
Tuesday 6 January
The disgraceful truth is that I shall run year into year, for I cant waste so many blank pages.
What a flourish I began 1924 with! And today, for the 165th time, Nelly has given notice— Won't be dictated to: must do as other girls do. This is the fruit of Bloomsbury.1 On the whole, I'm inclined to take her at her word. The nuisance of arranging life to suit her fads, & the pressure of 'other girls' is too much, good cook though she is, & honest, crusty old maid too, dependable, in the main, affectionate, kindly, but incurably fussy, nervy, unsubstantial. Anyhow, the servant question no longer much worries me.
Last night we dined at 3 Albert Road Mary's new villa.2 I like the new year to begin with warm friendly feelings—& it was a superb dinner. There were the children too, a nice girl & boy; a girl with lovely womans eyes, sympathetic, startled; & wild like a girl. (I want to begin to describe my own sex.) What do I mean about the expression? Extreme youth, & yet, one felt, this feeling has been existing forever; very feminine. Here I conceive my story—but I'm always conceiving stories now. Short ones —scenes—for instance The Old Man (a character of L.S.) The Professor on Milton—(an attempt at literary criticism)3 & now The Interruption, women talking alone. However, back to life. Where are we?
I spent this morning writing a note on an E[lizabe]than play—for

which I have been reading plays all this year.4 Then I found the minute hand of my watch had come off (this was talking to Lytton about [Samuel] Richardson last night—I found it off then): so I went into the printing room to see the time—found Angus & Leonard doing Simkin's bill. Stayed & laughed. L. went off to the office, when we had dog-walked round the Square. I came in & set a page of Nancy. Then out to Ingersoll to get my watch mended.5 Then dog walked. Then here. It being a black grained winter day; lengths of the pavement ink black where not lighted. Never shall I describe all the days I have noticed. I cannot hit it off, quite, & yet perhaps if I read this again I shall see what I meant then.
Rodmell was all gale & flood; these words are exact. The river overflowed. We had 7 days rain out of io. Often I could not face a walk. L. pruned, which needed heroic courage. My heroism was purely literary. I revised Mrs D[alloway]: the dullest part of the whole business of writing; the most depressing & exacting. The worst part is at the beginning (as usual) where the aeroplane has it all to itself for some pages, & it wears thin. L. read it; thinks it my best—but then has he not got to think so? Still I agree. He thinks it has more continuity than J[acob]s R[oom]. but is difficult owing to the lack of connection, visible, between the two themes.
Anyhow it is sent off to Clarks, 6k proofs will come next week. This is for Harcourt Brace, who has accepted without seeing & raised me to 15 p.c.6
I did not see very much at Rodmell, having to keep my eyes on the typewriter.
Angus was with us for Christmas, a very quiet, very considerate, unselfish deliberate young man, with a charming sense of humour— colourless, Lytton says: passive. But I think well of him, all the same.

Wednesday 18 March
These last pages belong to the Common Reader, & were written in bed with influenza;1 & now, at last, having sent off the last proofs today, I have got my new diary made, 6k shall close this, with a thousand apologies, 6k some ominous forebodings at the sight of all the blank pages.
VW here begins a new book, Diary XIV, on the title-page of which is written:
52 Tavistock Square WC
1925 Wednesday 18 March2
This disgrace has been already explained—I think: two books to see through the press, mainly between tea 6k dinner; influenza, 6k a distaste for the pen.3
At the moment (I have 7.1/2 before dinner) I can only note that the past is beautiful because one never realises an emotion at the time. It expands later, 6k thus we don't have complete emotions about the present, only about the past. This struck me on Reading platform, watching Nessa 6k Quentin kiss, he coming up shyly, yet with some emotion. This I shall remember; 6k make more of, when separated from all the business of crossing the platform, finding our bus ckc. That is why we dwell on the past, I think.
We went to see the children at school: the young men, I should say. Julian was shut up in a pound, pounding Mr Eliot's tennis court by way of punishment. (That suggests a story about a man whose ambition it was to buy a field; this kept him alive; when he bought it, he died.) Mr Goddard came up, 6k Julian shouted out, "I'm at it till 5" as though they were undergraduates.4 Not much public school about this; but oh

the horror of being Mr Goddard, & wandering out, this bitter day (it snowed) to welcome home the steeplechasers. When they ran in, they at once rolled on the ground, & were covered with rugs & coats. The last lap, their legs rose very weakly. J. & Q. were utterly cynical about this, & said no one enjoyed it, but it was thought the right thing to do. But this nib scratches.
The Woolfs travelled from Victoria, via Newhaven-Dieppe, to Paris on Thursday 26 March, then on by overnight train to Marseilles and to Cassis, where they stayed at the Hotel Cendrillon; they returned to London on my April.
Wednesday 8 April
Just back from Cassis. Often while I was there I thought how I would write here frequently & so get down some of the myriad impressions which I net every day. But directly we get back, what is it that happens? We strip & dive into the stream, & I am obsessed with a foolish idea that I have no time to stop & write, or that I ought to be doing something serious. Even now, I pelt along feverishly, thinking half the time, but I must stop & take Grizzle [dog] out; I must get my American books in order;1 the truth is, I must try to set aside half an hour in some part of my day, & consecrate it to diary writing. Give it a name & a place, & then perhaps, such is the human mind, I shall come to think it a duty, & disregard other duties for it.
I am under the impression of the moment, which is the complex one of coming back home from the South of France to this wide dim peaceful privacy—London (so it seemed last night) which is shot with the accident I saw this morning & a woman crying Oh oh oh faintly, pinned against the railings with a motor car on top of her. All day I have heard that voice. I did not go to her help; but then every baker & flower seller did that. A great sense of the brutality & wildness of the world remains with me—there was this woman in brown walking along the pavement— suddenly a red film car turns a somersault, lands on top of her, & one hears this oh, oh, oh. I was on my way to see Nessa's new house, & met Duncan in the square, but as he had seen nothing, he could not in the

least feel what I felt, or Nessa either, though she made some effort to connect it with Angelica's accident last spring. But I assured her it was only a passing brown woman; & so we went over the house composedly enough.2
Since I wrote, which is these last months, Jacques Raverat has died; after longing to die; & he sent me a letter about Mrs Dalloway which gave me one of the happiest days of my life.3 I wonder if this time I have achieved something? Well, nothing anyhow compared with Proust, in whom I am embedded now. The thing about Proust is his combination of the utmost sensibility with the utmost tenacity. He searches out these butterfly shades to the last grain. He is as tough as catgut & as evanescent as a butterfly's bloom. And he will I suppose both influence me & make me out of temper with every sentence of my own. Jacques died, as I say; & at once the siege of emotions began. I got the news with a party here— Clive, Bee How, Julia Strachey, Dadie.4 Nevertheless, I do not any longer feel inclined to doff the cap to death. I like to go out of the room talking, with an unfinished casual sentence on my lips. That is the effect it had on me—no leavetakings, no submission—but someone stepping out into the darkness. For her though the nightmare was terrific. All I can do now

is to keep natural with her, which is I believe a matter of considerable importance. More & more do I repeat my own version of Montaigne "Its life that matters".5
I am waiting to see what form of itself Cassis will finally cast up in my mind. There are the rocks. We used to go out after breakfast & sit on the rocks, with the sun on us. L. used to sit without a hat, writing on his knee. One morning he found a sea urchin—they are red, with spikes which quiver slightly. Then we would go a walk in the afternoon, right up over the hill, into the woods, where one day we heard the motor cars & discovered the road to La Ciotaft] just beneath. It was stony, steep & very hot. We heard a great chattering birdlike noise once, & I bethought me of the frogs. The ragged red tulips were out in the fields; all the fields were little angular shelves cut out of the hill, & ruled & ribbed with vines; & all red, & rosy & purple here & there with the spray of some fruit tree in bud. Here & there was an angular white, or yellow or blue washed house, with all its shutters tightly closed; & flat paths round it, & once rows of stocks; an incomparable cleanness & definiteness everywhere. At La Ciota[t] great orange ships rose up out of the blue water of the little bay. All these bays are very circular, & fringed with the pale coloured plaster houses, very tall, shuttered, patched & peeled, now with a pot & tufts of green on them, now with clothes, drying; now an old old woman looking. On the hill, which is stony as a desert, the nets were drying; & then in the streets children 6k girls gossiped & meandered all in pale bright shawls & cotton frocks, while the men picked up the earth of the main square to make a paved court of it. The Hotel Cendrillon is a white house, with red tiled floors, capable of housing perhaps 8 people. There were Miss Toogood, the Howards, Miss Betsy Roberts, Mr Gurney, Mr Francis &, finally, Mr Hugh Anderson & Mr Garrow Tomlin.6 All deserve pages of description. And then the whole hotel atmosphere provided me with many ideas: oh so cold, indifferent, superficially polite, & exhibiting such odd relationships: as if human nature were now reduced to a kind of code, which it has devised to meet these emergencies, where people who do not know each other meet, & claim their rights as members of the same tribe. As a matter of fact, we got into touch all round; but our depths were not invaded. But L. & I were too too happy,

as they say; if it were now to die &c.7 Nobody shall say of me that I have not known perfect happiness, but few could put their finger on the moment, or say what made it. Even I myself, stirring occasionally in the pool of content, could only say But this is all I want; could not think of anything better; & had only my half superstitious feeling as the Gods who must when they have created happiness, grudge it. Not if you get it in unexpected ways though.
Sunday 19 April
It is now after dinner, our first summer time night, & the mood for writing has left me, only just brushed me & left me. I have not achieved my sacred half hour yet. But think—in time to come I would rather read something here than reflect that I did polish off Mr Ring Lardner successfully.8 I'm out to make £300 this summer by writing, & build a bath & hot water range at Rodmell. But, hush, hush—my books tremble on the verge of coming out, & my future is uncertain. As for forecasts—hs just on the cards Mrs Dalloway is a success (Harcourt thinks it "wonderful"), & sells 2,000—I dont expect it: I expect a slow silent increase of fame, such has come about, rather miraculously, since Js R. was published; my value mounting steadily as a journalist, though scarcely a copy sold. And I am not very nervous—rather; & I want as usual to dig deep down into my new stories, without having a looking glass flashed in my eyes— Todd, to wit; Colefax to wit et cetera.9

Lytton came in the other night. He seemed to me autumnal; with that charming rectitude of spirit which no one else attains so perfectly I think. His justice of mind is considerable. But Christ is dismissed, to his disappointment, for he grows more & more fussy about subjects: Christ, he says did not exist: was a figment; & so much is known that really he couldn't pull it all together in one book. Then perhaps Philip Ritchie is waning.10 We talked of old buggers & their lack of attraction for young men. My anti-bugger revolution has run round the world, as I hoped it would. I am a little touched by what appears their contrition, & anxiety to condone their faults. Yet if I cant say what's in my mind, & have a fling with Clive's Colonel now & then, what's the use of me?11 The pale star of the Bugger has been in the ascendant too long. Julian agrees emphatically. We had Good Friday at Rodmell—June weather, & again this downy billowy wave beneath us: ah, but how quickly I sink; what violet shadows there are between the high lights, & one, perhaps, as unreasonable as another. But this properly belongs to a story.12
Yesterday we went to Max's show with dear shabby old Angus, who seems to me an elder brother, 20 years younger than I am.13 We came back to tea (over all this the bloom of the past descends as I write-—it becomes sad, beautiful, memorable) & ate a great many buns, & then discussed Murphy.14 Alas!—she has a temper. She is an ill-conditioned mongrel woman, of no charm, a Bohemian scallywag, something like Irish stew to look at, & not destined for a long life here, I suppose. But Angus, though plaintive is gentlemanly; does not insist, & sees the drawbacks;

Leonard will have to pull out the tooth on Thursday. I suspect some hidden grievance: I suspect she harbours scores.
Marjory & her Tom looked in at the basement this evening, very happy, L. says, & indeed I think she must enjoy her situation to the last ounce—money, food, security, & a supply of young men, & her faithful Tom, & a little dress allowance, & breakfast late, & consideration. She is a nice trusty creature into the bargain, & if I wished to see anyone, I daresay it would be her.15
At this moment, all we wish is to escape seeing anyone. Tomorrow I shall buy a new dress. I observe here that I am becoming jerky & jumpy, & my conscience is asserting that I ought to read Mr Ring Lardner & earn my 50 guineas.
Monday 20 April
Happiness is to have a little string onto which things will attach themselves. For example, going to my dressmaker in Judd Street, or rather thinking ofa dress I could get her to make, & imagining it made— that is the string, which as if it dipped loosely into a wave of treasure brings up pearls sticking to it. Poor Murphy is in the glumps, owing to Leonard's fiery harshness—each of which epithets he would most certainly deny. She has no string dipping into the green wave: things don't connect for her; & add up into those entrancing bundles which are happiness. And my days are likely to be strung with them. I like this London life in early summer—the street sauntering & square haunting, ,6k then if my books (I never speak of L.'s pamphlet) were to be a success; if we could begin building at Monks, & put up wireless for Nelly, & get the Skeats to live at Shanks' cottage—if—if—if16—What will happen is some intensities of pleasure, some profound plunges of gloom. Bad reviews, being ignored; & then some delicious clap of compliment. But really what I should like would be to have £3 to buy a pair of rubber soled boots, & go for country walks on Sundays.

One thing in considering my state of mind now, seems to me beyond dispute, that I have at last, bored down into my oil well, & can't scribble fast enough to bring it all to the surface. I have now at least 6 stories welling up in me, & feel, at last, that I can coin all my thoughts into words. Not but what an infinite number of problems remain; but I have never felt this rush & urgency before. I believe I can write much more quickly: if writing it is—this dash at the paper of a phrase, & then the typing & retyping—trying it over, the actual writing being now like the sweep of a brush; I fill it up afterwards. Now suppose I might become one of the interesting—I will not say great—but interesting novelists? Oddly, for all my vanity, I have not until now had much faith in my novels, or thought them my own expression.
Monday 27 April
The Common Reader was out on Thursday:17 this is Monday, & so far
I have not heard a word about it, private or public: it is as if one tossed
a stone into a pond, & the waters closed without a ripple. And I am
perfectly content, & care less than I have ever cared, & make this note
just to remind me next time of the sublime progress of my books. I have
been sitting to Vogue, the Becks that is, in their mews, which Mr Woolner
built as his studio, & perhaps it was there he thought of my mother,
whom he wished to marry, I think.18 But my present]
,   . T                   reflection is that people have any number of states of
what 1 mean                                             11
consciousness: & I should like to investigate the party
consciousness, the frock consciousness &c. The fashion world at the
Becks—Mrs Garland was there superintending a display—is certainly
one;19 where people secrete an envelope which connects them & protects

them from others, like myself, who am outside the envelope, foreign bodies. These states are very difficult (obviously I grope for words) but I'm always coming back to it. The party consciousness, for example: Sybil's consciousness. You must not break it. It is something real. You must keep it up; conspire together. Still I cannot get at what I mean. Then I meant to dash off Graves before I forget him.20
Figure a bolt eyed blue shirted shockheaded hatless man in a blue overcoat standing goggling at the door at 4.30, on Friday. "Mrs Woolf?" I dreading & suspecting some Nation genius, some young man determined to unbosom himself; rushed him to the basement, where he said "I'm Graves". "I'm Graves". Everybody stared. He appeared to have been rushing through the air at 60 miles an hour & to have alighted temporarily. So he came up, &, wily as I am, I knew that to advance holding the kettle in a dishclout was precisely the right method, attitude, pose. The poor boy is all emphasis protestation & pose. He has a crude likeness to Shelley, save that his nose is a switchback & his lines blurred. But the consciousness of genius is bad for people. He stayed till 7.15 (we were going to Caesar & Cleopatra—a strange rhetorical romantic early Shaw play21) & had at last to say so, for he was so thick in the delight of explaining his way of life to us that no bee stuck faster to honey. He cooks, his wife cleans; 4 children are brought up in the elementary school; the villagers give them vegetables; they were married in Church; his wife calls herself Nancy Nicolson; won't go to Garsington, said to him I must have a house for nothing; on a river; in a village with a square church tower; near but not on a railway—all of which, as she knows her mind, he procured. Calling herself Nicolson has sorted her friends into sheep & goats. All this to us sounded like the usual self consciousness of young men, especially as he threw in, gratuitously, the information that he descends from dean rector, Bishop, Von Ranker &c &c &c: only in order to say that he despises them. Still, still, he is a nice ingenuous rattle headed young man; but why should our age put this burden of

proof on us? Surely once one could live simply without protestations. I tried, perhaps, to curry favour, as my weakness is. L. was adamant. Then we were offered a ticket for the Cup tie, to see wh. Graves has come to London after 6 years; cant travel in a train without being sick; is rather proud of his sensibility. No I don't think he'll write great poetry: but what will you? The sensitive are needed too; the halfbaked, stammering stuttering, who perhaps improve their own quarter of Oxfordshire. And on Sunday we had our first walk, to Epping.22
Wednesday 29 April
Hastily (Moore waiting23) I must record the fact of Tom's long gaslit emotional rather tremulous & excited visit last night, which informed us of his release (But I have not yet sent in my demission) from the Bank; some heavensent appointment, providing "4/5th's of my present salary" & a guarantee, being "humanly speaking" certain, to take effect next October—whether Lady Rothermere (who has become 'very nice') or the 4ly review, he sayeth not. Then he has a house near Sloane Sqre in view, rent £58 only, & so hopes to start fresh, & has been thinking over his state these past weeks, being alone, with time on his hands.24 He has seen his whole life afresh, seen his relations to the world, & to Vivien in particular, become humbler suppler more humane—good, sensitive honourable man as he is, accusing himself of being the American husband, (_ & wishing to tell me privately (L. gone to fetch the letters) what store V. sets by me, has done nothing but write since last June, because I told her to! He then defended not writing which is her device he said, 6k went into her p[s]ychology. Then he said to L. (having told us that he must space his remarks very carefully to fit in all he had to say) Do you know

anything about psycho-analysis? L. said yes, in his responsible way; & Tom then told us the queer story—how Martin the dr. set V. off thinking of her childhood terror of loneliness, & now she cant let him, Tom, out of her sight. There he has sat mewed in her room these 3 months, poor pale creature, or if he has to go out, comes in to find her in a half fainting state.25
"Tomorrow will be wretched" he said, for he was now away from 8 to 11. We advised another doctor. But whether its doctors or sense or holiday or travel or some drastic method unknown thats to cure that little nervous self conscious bundle—heaven knows. She has the abstract, he the historic mind he said. The upshot was a queer sense ofhis emotion in coming to tell us all this—something not merely touching to my vanity but to my sense of human worth, I think; his liking for us, affection, trust in Leonard, & being so much at his ease in some subconscious way he said, not in conversation, with me, all making me lay my arm on his shoulder; not a very passionate caress, but the best I can do.
And now I'm a little fidgety about the Common Reader, not a single word of it from a soul, & perhaps a Review in the Lit Sup tomorrow. But this is quite recognisably superficial; beneath my fidgets being considerable stability.
Friday 1 May
This is a note for future reference as they say. The Common Reader came out 8 days ago, & so far not a single review has appeared, & no body has written to me or spoken to me about it or in any way acknowledged the fact of its existence; save Maynard, Lydia, & Duncan. Clive is conspicuously dumb; Mortimer has flu & cant review it; Nancy saw him reading it, but reported no opinion: all signs which point to a dull chill depressing reception; & complete failure.11 have just come through the hoping fearing stage, & now see my disappointment floating like an old

bottle in my wake & am off on fresh adventures. Only if the same thing happens to Dalloway one need not be surprised. But I must write to Gwen.2
Monday 4 May
This is the temperature chart of a book. We went to Cambridge, & Goldie said he thought me the finest living critic: the paralysed man, Hayward, said, in his jerky angular way: "Who wrote that extraordinarily good article on the Elizabethans 2 or 3 months ago in the Lit. Sup.?" I pointed to my breast.3 Now there's one sneering review in Country Life, almost inarticulate with feebleness, trying to say what a Common reader is, & another, says Angus, in the Star, laughing at Nessa's cover.4 So from this I prognosticate a good deal of criticism on the ground that I'm obscure & odd; & some enthusiasm; a slow sale, & an increased reputation. Oh yes—my reputation increases. But I am headachy, & cannot go to a concert with Angus, & Leonard is giving Randall his farewell dinner,5 & it [is] a relief to sit quiet (the joy of giving up an engagement is supreme) & I wish I could describe Pernel, Cambridge, Braithwaite & Hayward, with a postscript for Thompson. A lovely place full, like all places, now, of this wave of the past. Walking past the Darwins I noticed the willows; I thought with that growing maternal affection which now comes to me, of myself there; of Rupert; then I went to Newnham, & kindled Mrs Palmer with talk of Pernel marrying an Archbishop.6

No, I can't fire it off [?]; Mrs Asquith sticks in my gizzard;7 I shall read Moore till dinner, & (a paper) then again till Leonard comes in. No, I dont want to hear Bach, & by giving Angus the tickets, secured him a charming young man for company.
Pernel was easier than I've ever known her. We sat over her fire, gossiping—how Kate died, taking the dog for a walk till a week of the end; entirely reserved; like a skeleton, like a dead person walking with sarcoma; no doctor. No mention of herself 6k the 58 brown diaries burnt, I suppose.8
Saturday 9 May
Just back from the Greek play at Chiswick with Lydia & Berta Ruck; a fine spring day, all the trees out driving across the Park; that transient journey being founded on a walk with Nessa Clive & Thoby, & Thoby & I agreed in calling Hyde Park 'urbane'.9
As for the Common Reader, the Lit. Sup. had close on 2 columns sober & sensible praise—neither one thing nor the other—my fate in the Times. And Goldie writes that he thinks "this is the best criticism in English— humorous, witty & profound."10—My fate is to be treated to all extremes & all mediocrities. But I never get an enthusiastic review in the Lit. Sup. And it will be the same for Dalloway, which now approaches.
Braithwaite, both Apostles, next day, as LW breakfasted with the one and lunched with the other. George Derwent Thompson (b. 1903) was a Fellow of King's who in 1937 became Professor of Greek at Birmingham; Richard Bevan Braithwaite (b. 1900), also a Fellow of King's, was to become a University lecturer and then Knightbridge Professor of Moral Philosophy at Cambridge, 1953-67.

I'm jangled & jaded, having sat next the sea horse Sally Onions, who oozes lust at the sight of young men dancing. Last night we made a meagre meal with the Sangers,11 whose mediocrity of comfort & taste saddens me: oh for a little beauty in life, as Berta Ruck might say—a lewd woman that, deposited in a lewd South Kensington House, like an equestrienne, in pale Jacon with a carnation, & her front teeth with a red ridge on them where her lips had touched them.12 Little Lydia I liked: how does her mind work? Like a lark soaring; a sort of glorified instinct inspires her: I suppose a very nice nature, & direction at Maynard's hands.
Last night we had Morgan & Brace;13 Morgan pleading with Leonard to come & see him—operated on for a broken bone in the wrist, I should have added, but it is now
Thursday 14 May
The first day of summer, leaves visibly drawing out of the bud, & the Square almost green. Oh what a country day—& some of my friends are now reading Mrs D. in the country.14
I meant to register more of my books temperatures. CR. does not sell; but is praised. I was really pleased to open the Manchester Guardian this morning & read Mr Fausset on The Art of V.W. Brilliance combined with integrity; profound as well as eccentric.15 Now if only the Times would speak out thus, but the Times mumbles & murmurs like a man sucking pebbles—did I say that I had nearly 2 mumbling columns on me there? But the odd thing is this: honestly I am scarcely a shade nervous about Mrs D. Why is this? Really I am a little bored, for the first time, at thinking how much I shall have to talk about it this summer. The truth is that writing is the profound pleasure & being read the superficial. I'm now all on the strain with desire to stop journalism & get on to To the Lighthouse. This is going to be fairly short: to have father's character done complete in it; & mothers; & St Ives; & childhood; 6k all the usual things I try to put in—life, death &c. But the centre is father's character,

sitting in a boat, reciting We perished, each alone, while he crushes a dying mackerel—However, I must refrain.16 I must write a few little stories first, & let the Lighthouse simmer, adding to it between tea & dinner till it is complete for writing out.
Yesterday was a terrific chatter day—Desmond on top of Dr Leyes, Lord Olivier on top of Desmond, James & Dadie to finish off with, while L. had I forget how many press interviews & committees into the bargain. The League of Nations is booming (Innes, I mean.)17 But I meant to describe my dear old Desmond, whom it rejoiced me to see again, & he held out both his hands, & I set him in his chair & we talked till 7 o'clock. He is rather worn & aged; a little, I think, feeling that here's 45 on him & nothing achieved, except indeed the children, whom he dotes on— Micky to write, Dermod & Rachel trilling & warbling on flute & piano:18 all his human relations very fertile & flourishing, but oh, he said, talking of Houseman, don't let him give up the Corn Exchange & take to literature!19 I saw him thinking ofhis 50 articles for 5 years, his welter of old articles lying dusty in boxes, & now Geoffrey Scott promoted to do Donne, which Desmond should have done in the year 1912. I

remember him telling me the story at Brunswick Square. So I said I would take the thing in hand & see it through which touched him, for children are not enough, after all; one wants something to be made out of oneself alone—& 5 boxes of dusty articles are rather raggy & rotten for 45 years. And he praised the CR. with enthusiasm; & will write on it,20 & so we chattered along; Vernon Lee, with her cheap rings in exquisite taste; & her idiomatic Italian; & her spiteful way of seeing things, so that she dare not write her memoirs; Lily Langtry coming down the playhouse steps & her daughter looming behind her, loveliness that "struck me in the breast"; also Logan & Ottoline—how Alys is ill ofthe cancer again— "a most unhappy miserable life poor woman—" L. having the new Mrs B.R. on one side, would be chafed to death by Ott. next door; but like a fool, Logan made none of this clear, & only complained that the village peace of Chelsea would be destroyed by O. wh. naturally she resented.21 In all this, Desmond acts as solvent & go between, everyone sponging on his good nature & sense. What else did we discuss? The E[lizabe]thans? The Phoenix; poor Ray Litvin's miserable big mouth, & little body;22

when L. came, & then the dinner party, I just having time for a race round the Square; both Dadie & James very easy & affable, indeed for Dadie I feel considerable affection—so sensitive & tender is he, & one of these days will get a pull on himself, & be less ofa quicksilver. Indeed, staying on he talked very seriously & excitedly ofhis dissertation & poets use of words, how they fix on to a word & fill it out with meaning & make it symbolic. But what these scholars want is to get at books through writing books, not through reading them.23
But I must remember to write about my clothes next time I have an impulse to write. My love of clothes interests me profoundly: only it is not love; & what it is I must discover.
Friday i5 May
Two unfavourable reviews of Mrs D (Western Mail & Scotsman24): unintelligible, not art &c: & a letter from a young man in Earls Court "This time you have done it—you have caught life & put it in a book ..." Please forgive this outburst, but further quotation is unnecessary; & I dont think I should bother to write this, if I weren't jangled what by? The sudden heat, I think, & the racket of life. It is bad for me to see my own photograph. And I have been lunching with Desmond, & reading that dear old Owl's journalism. The thing is, he cant thrust through an article. Now, Lytton or I, though we mayn't think better or write better, have a drive in us, which makes an article whole. And yet there are things worth keeping, & he becomes moved, & irrational when he thinks of it, & I want him to be pleased— So we lunched in the grill of the Connaught Rooms where other men were talking business, had a bottle of wine & delved into the filth packets as he calls them.25 Home to find Vogue sending photographs—more photographs: T.P. wants one, the Morning Post another.26 & the CR. sells 2 or 3 copies a day.

We are going to the play out into this tawny coloured London—but journalism is the devil. I cannot write after reading it. No time—& I must change, & write about clothes some day soon.
Sunday 17 May21
A wire from Raymond in Paris—just read Mrs D. it is quite beautiful— & a very good, outspoken wholly praising review of C. R. in the Observer —"no living critic" &c.28 But this is not all vanity; I'm recording for curiosity: the fate of a book. The only judgment on Mrs D. I await with trepidation (but thats too strong) is Morgan's. He will say something enlightening.
Just back (all my days here begin with this) from Sutton.29 Oh it is full summer weather—so hot one can't walk on the sunny side, & all London—even Lavender Hill Lambeth which peels visibly in the sun— transmogrified. We had a bad walk, all along the cinder track, with soft footpaths inviting wh. we could not take, owing to L.'s lecture, delivered in a semi-religious sanctuary, with hymns & prayers & a chapter from the Bible. The whole of Sutton was hymning something: soft intense strains of human [word omitted by VW] went warbling about, as I sat; & I was touched & moved by it: the world so beautiful, God's gift to us, said the Chairman, who looked poor man as if he had never had an ounce of pleasure in his life. Things become very familiar to me, so that I sometimes think humanity is a vast wave, undulating: the same, I mean: the same emotions here that there were at Richmond. Please have some tea—we shall be hurt if you don't accept our hospitality. Accordingly we do; & the same queer brew of human fellowship, is brewed; & people look the same; & joke in the same way, & come to these odd superficial agreements, wh. if you think of them persisting & wide spread—in jungles, storms, birth & death—are not superficial; but rather profound, I think. We came home on top of a bus all the way for a shilling, with the usual glimpses down lanes, into farmyards, at running streams, persisting in between villas, & behind sunbaked yellow or black motor roads. A little girl on the bus asked her mother how many inches are there in a mile. Her mother repeated this to me. I said you must go to school &

they'll tell you. But she is at school said her mother. She's seven; & he (the baby on her knee) goes to school. He's three. So I gave them two biscuits left over, & the little girl (see my egotism) with her bright excitable eyes, & eagerness to grasp the whole universe reminded me of myself, asking questions of my mother. We saw Lambeth, & I imagined the frolics of clergymen in the boscage, which is very thick; crossed Westminster Bridge; admired the Houses of Parliament & their fretted lacy look; passed the Cenotaph, which L. compromised by sitting with his hat off all the way up Whitehall,30 & so home, passing a nigger gentleman, perfectly fitted out in swallow tail & bowler & gold headed cane; & what were his thoughts? Of the degradation stamped on him, every time he raised his hand & saw it black as a monkeys outside, tinged with flesh colour within?
Yesterday we had tea with Margaret in her new house. There are three poplars, & behind them St Paul's. But I don't want to live in the suburbs again. There we sat, & I teased her, & she me, & she minded a little, & got red & then white, as if her centre were not very firm. She is severe to Lilian, who has the small rooms & is not allowed to plant flowers, she said bitterly, for it worries Margaret, & so nothing is done to the garden, which too worries Margaret. For these worries, she takes Ethel M. Dell & Dickens. Why, she said, should D.s characters be like people, when he can create people?—an interesting criticism, I think. We hit it off' very well, chiefly owing to my wildness & harum scarumness, I think; & I am very fond of her, & sorry for her, since how awful it would be to 'retire' at 60: to sit down & look at poplar trees? Moreover, she once said she had 'compromised'; her father making entire work impossible; & she now regrets things, I imagine; has seen so little of the world, & carried nothing to the extreme. Lilian irritates too, compared with what she might have had. But, after all, thats enough.31
The time is now ripe for dinner. And I must answer some of my admirers. Never have I felt so much admired—so tomorrow, snubs will snub me back again into trim.

Wednesday 20 May32
Well, Morgan admires. This is a weight off my mind. Better than Jacob he says; was sparing of words; kissed my hand, & on going said he was awfully pleased, very happy (or words to that effect) about it. He thinks—but I wont go into detailed criticism: I shall hear more; & this is only about the style being simpler, more like other peoples this time.
I dined with the Sitwells last night.33 Edith is an old maid. I had never conceived this. I thought she was severe, implacable & tremendous; rigid in her own conception. Not a bit of it. She is, I guess, a little fussy, very kind, beautifully mannered, & a little reminding me of Emphie Case!34 She is elderly too, almost my age, & timid, & admiring & easy & poor, & I liked her more than admired or was frightened of her. Nevertheless, I do admire her work, & thats what I say of hardly anyone: she has an ear, & not a carpet broom; a satiric vein; & some beauty in her. How one exaggerates public figures! How one makes up a person immune from one's own pleasures & failings! But Edith is humble: has lived in a park alone till 27, & so described nothing but sights & sounds; then came to London, & is trying to get a little emotion into her poetry—all of which I suspected, & think promising. Then how eager she was to write for the Press, which had always been her great ambition, she said. Nothing could be more conciliatory & less of an eagle than she; odd looking too, with her humorous old maids smile, her half shut eyes, her lank hair, her delicate hands, wearing a large ring, & fine feet, & her brocade dress, blue & silver. Nothing of the protester or pamph[l]eteer or pioneer seemed in her—rather the well born Victorian spinster. So I must read her afresh. There were Francis [Birrell], Raymond [Mortimer], [Arthur] Waley & a little American toad called Towne, who soaked himself in liquor & became almost loving to us all.35 The three Sitwells have

considerable breeding about them; I like their long noses, & grotesque faces. As for the house, Osbert is at heart an English squire, a collector, but of Bristol glass, old fashion plates, Victorian cases of humming birds, & not of foxes brushes & deers horns. His rooms are all stuck about with these objects. And I liked him too. But why are they thought daring & clever? Why are they the laughing stocks of the music halls & the penny a liners?
Not much talk; all easy goodnatured generalities after dinner, Francis bawling, Waley sombre & demure, & I very indulgent with my compliments: & now tomorrows Supt [TLS] & then (here L. came in & told me about R. Macdonald at the Labour party meeting).
Monday 1 June
Bank holiday, & we are in London. To record my books fates slightly bores me; but now both are floated, & Mrs D. doing surprisingly well. 1070 already sold. I recorded Morgan's opinion: then Vita was a little doubtful;1 then Desmond, whom I see frequently about his book, dashed all my praise by saying that Logan thought the CR. well enough, but nothing more. Desmond has an abnormal power for depressing one. He takes the edge off life in some extraordinary way; I love him; but his balance & goodness & humour, all heavenly in themselves, somehow diminish lustre. I think I feel this not only about my work, but about life. However, now comes Mrs Hardy to say that Thomas reads, & hears the CR. read, with "great pleasure". Indeed, save for Logan, & he's a salt veined American, I have had high praise. Also Tauchnitz asks about them.2
was still at this time on the start of the British Museum. The American was Charles Hanson Towne (1877-1949), novelist and editor, who in 1925 visited England in the capacity of a literary agent, specifically to meet 'new writers who were coming along'. In his book So Far So Good (New York, 1945)) Towne related that he was invited to dine by Somerset Maugham, who 'asked me whom I should most care to meet, of all the writers. I begged for Arnold Bennett and H. G. Wells; and they both came. And, as a generous extra attraction, that wonderful writer, Virginia Woolf.' There is no record that VW ever met Somerset Maugham, and Towne has evidently confused different occasions.

We are now considering a change to a widow called by courtesy Smith, Jones' sister; which will despatch poor Murphy, but one can't be very sentimental over her, & to settle in with a placid powerful professional woman is precisely what we want to pull us together. Angus is a little languid—not that we in any way, I hasten to say, complain of him; but Murphy is temperamental, untidy, sloppy, & turns crusty about accounts.3
A week ago we had a great invasion—Ottoline surprising us with Julian Philip & a Gathorne Hardy.4 Ottoline was very affectionate, & perhaps affection being so much time & habit, I too have some real affection for her. But how can I analyse my feelings? I like everyone, I said at 46 the other night; & Duncan said I liked everyone, & thought everyone quite new each time. That was at dinner to meet Miss Warner, the new Chatto & Windus poetess, & indeed she has some merit— enough to make me spend 2/6 on her, I think.5 It is a sunny fitful day, & standing in Hyde Park to listen to the socialists, that furtive Jew, Loeb, who dogs my life at intervals of io years, touched us on the shoulder, & took 2 photographs of us, measuring his distance with a black tape, provided by his wife. He usually tells people to hold one end next their hearts: but this is a joke. He had been hanging about Covent Garden to photograph singers & had lunched at 2.30. I asked if he were a professional, which hurt his pride: he owned to taking a great interest in it, & said he had a large collection.6
Tom came in yesterday, rather rockier than last time, not quite so flushed with emotion, & inclined to particularise the state of Vivien's bowels too closely for my taste. We both almost laughed; she has a queer rib, a large liver, & so on. What is more to the point is that Tom is to be

the editor ofa new (mag) quarterly, which some old firm is issuing in the autumn, & all his works must go to them—a blow for us.7
He said nothing of my books. With great dignity, I did not ask for his opinion. People often dont read books for weeks & weeks. And anyhow, for my part I hate giving an opinion.
[Friday 5 June]8
To work off the intense depression left by Desmond. What does this come from? But I have just made this beautiful image—how he is like a wave that never breaks, but lollops one this way & that way & the sail hangs on ones mast & the sun beats down—& its all the result' of dining & sitting talking till 3 in the morning with El[izabe]th Bibesco, with whom I had tea yesterday.9 She is a fat housekeeper ofa woman, excellent manager, bustling, economical, entirely without nerves, imagination, or sensibility, but what a good housekeeper, how she keeps the books down, & what a good woman of business, how well she would suit an innkeeper, & how she would see to his interests—entertain his customers with her; sprightly rather broad jokes, standing with her thumbs in               ...
her armpits on the other side ofthe bar, with all her false diamonds flashing, & her little pig eyes, & her broad fat hips & cheeks. This is the spiritual truth about Bibesco: the fact being that she lies in bed, in green crepe de chine, with real diamonds on her fingers, & a silk quilt, & thinks she talks brilliantly to the most intellectual set in London—so she does, to Desmond, & Mortimer, & poor Philip Ritchie, & I was half in a rage, having sacrificed my Mozart 5tet to her, from which I should have got gallons of pure pleasure instead of the breakfast cup of rather impure delight. For it had its fun. There was old Asquith in [page ends].
And then I was ruffled by Nelly, but got over it, by spending £50 of charm. And now I remember—how fatal this is to remember after a quarrel what one did not say—how I might have said, If you have Lottie every day, why should I not have my friends? But one can't—& she is jealous, that is the truth. And next time I will say it—& it was Miss Mayor

coming that upset us; 'always people when we have dinner parties". And we had Vita, Edith Sitwell, Morgan, Dadie, Kitty Leaf10—old Vita presenting me with a whole tree of blue Lupins, & being very uncouth 6k clumsy, while Edith was like a Roman Empress, so definite clear cut, magisterial & yet with something of the humour of a fishwife—a little too commanding about her own poetry & ready to dictate—tremulously pleased by Morgan's compliments (& he never praised Vita, who sat hurt, modest, silent, like a snubbed schoolboy).11
Monday 8 June
This is the hottest June on record. Do not take this seriously—only it is very hot. & we were at Karin's yesterday. There was Irene & her Phil [Noel-Baker]. I am too sleepy having got up at \ to 6 this morning to describe her. She has spread a little, has a double chin, an emphatic nose, & the feet of gulls on sand round her eyes, which are of the old staring sea green blue. And she has her old ways—her straightforwardness, downrightness, ideals; love of adventure, but none of this is so becoming as of old. For in fact she's grown stereotyped, metallic, harsh; her voice brazen, & her cheeks crude. She suspected me, & suspected Bloomsbury, & adored Leonard, whom she thought so salutary for Phil, but we both suspect [a] scheme for making Phil the foreign sec. in the next Labour Government. I liked her best when she talked about the Greek peasants, & that side may retain some charm. But she talks, talks, talks; thrusts her way with a hard kind of energy into whatever may be going forward— would like, I imagine, to wire pull, & be hostess, & know the right people, but instead protests a horror of success, & wants to keep Phil unspoilt. She also wants to be the mistress of men, I imagine, & a little resents that age should have unseated her from that familiar post, as it very obviously has. She veered, as usual, towards Desmond, professed her horror of "hurting Molly—a very gallant creature", & almost drove L. distracted by asking him what he thought of the character of every politician.12

No, she has not worn well; the plating has come off & she's rather steely & common underneath. Needless to say, I had some waves of ancient emotion, chiefly at the sound of her voice & sight of her hands— hands expressing motherhood, perhaps; but mostly felt very flat, unable to pump up anything, & thus uncomfortable. To this, the sordid East End country, the woman who whispers with a gashed throat, the terrific pound home along the hot road, added. And the taxi never came, & we had a second night of it, hearing good, pure hearted Phil, with his principles & his ability, & his athleticism, read aloud to Irene till late.
Sunday 14 June
A disgraceful confession—this is Sunday morning, & just after ten, & here I am sitting down to write diary & not fiction or reviews, without any excuse, except the state of my mind. After finishing those two books, though, one can't concentrate directly on a new one; & then the letters, the talk, the reviews, all serve to enlarge the pupil of my mind more & more. I cant settle in, contract, & shut myself off. I've written 6 little stories, scrambled them down untidily, & have thought out, perhaps too clearly, To the Lighthouse. And both books so far are successful. More of Dalloway has been sold this month than of Jacob in a year. I think it possible we may sell 2,000. The Common one is making money this week. And I get treated at great length & solemnity by old gentlemen.
A powerful, heavy, light blue eyed woman of 50, Mrs Cartwright wants to succeed Murphy; & Murphy wants to stay.13 How people want work! How tremendous a pull a very little money has in the world! But what the solution is to be, & how we are to find it, I know not. Here I salute Leonard with unstinted, indeed childlike, adoration. Somehow he will gently & firmly decide the whole thing, while Angus & I wobble & prevaricate. But then I have a child's trust in Leonard. Waking this morning, rather depressed that Mrs D. did not sell yesterday, that we
stayed on their visit to Greece in 1906. There had been some attachment between Irene and Desmond MacCarthy (see / V'W Diary, 27 January 1918; and for Molly MacCarthy see Appendix I), but in 1915 she had married Philip Noel-Baker (b. 1889), who had been a scholar and noted athlete at King's College, Cambridge; he had subsequently worked for the League of Nations, and since 1924 had been Professor of International Relations at London University. He was seeking election to Parliament in the Labour interest, and was elected in 1929, when he became Parliamentary Private Secretary to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. 13. Mrs Cartwright did succeed Bernadette Murphy in July, and remained at the Hogarth Press until 31 March 1930.

had Peter [Lucas], Eileen Power & Noll & Ray [Strachey] last night14 & found it hard work, & not a single compliment vouchsafed me, that I had bought a glass necklace for £1, that I had a sore throat 6k a streaming nose, rather under the weather, I say, I snuggled in to the core of my life, which is this complete comfort with L., & there found everything so satisfactory & calm that I revived myself, & got a fresh start; feeling entirely immune. The immense success of our life, is I think, that our treasure is hid away; or rather in such common things that nothing can touch it. That is, if one enjoys a bus ride to Richmond, sitting on the green smoking, taking the letters out of the box, airing the marmots, combing Grizzle, making an ice, opening a letter, sitting down after dinner, side by side, & saying "Are you in your stall, brother?"—well, what can trouble this happiness? And every day is necessarily full of it. If we depended upon making speeches, or money, or getting asked to parties—which reminds me of Ottoline's ghastly party the other night. What possessed me to talk all the time to Helen Anrep? Partly that the plethora of young men slightly annoys me. Really, I am not a good lioness. With all my vanity, I'm come now to be a little cynical, or why don't I so much relish the admiration of the Turners, Kitchins, & Gathorne Hardys? A woman is much more warmly sympathetic. She carries her atmosphere with her. And Ott.'s powers of hostesry are all worn threadbare. People sat about at great distances, & one had a sense of the clock ticking & Ott. saying This is a failure, a failure, & not knowing how to pick the pieces up.15
Now I must answer Gerald Brenan, & .read the Genji; for tomorrow

I make a second £20 from Vogue.16 Did I say that I am rejected by Sybil? From being Sybil, she has become Lady Colefax. No invitations for a month.
Tuesday 16 June
This is the fag end of my morning's work on Genji, which runs a little too easily from my pen & must be compressed 6k compacted. Dalloway, I fear, has hit her head against some impassable barrier of the public, just as Jacob did, 6k scarcely sells these last 3 days. Yet my friends are enthusiastic—really so, I think; 6k ready to acclaim me successful, arrived, triumphant with this book: Clive, Mary, Molly, Roger, my latest allies. We have sold 1240, I think; so the wave spread further than Jacob, 6k has a ripple left perhaps.
Tonight is Leonard's festival night, the feast of the Brethren Apostles, 6k presumably some overflow of them here. "Why do human beings invent these ways of torturing themselves?" Them's his words; for he has to preside 6k speak.17 Old Lytton, I am reminded, has fairly passed from our lives. No word about my books; no visits since Easter. I imagine that when he takes a new love, 6k he has Angus, he gets surly, like a stag; he feels a little ridiculous, uneasy, 6k does not relish the company of old cynical friends like ourselves. And in fact, when I hear the story from Angus, of his agony 6k entreaty 6k despair, I only feel slightly nauseated. He makes the young men pity him 6k laugh at him, 6k there is a touch of senility in this exposure of himself, while, practically speaking, his amours land him in society of the most tepid, milk 6k watery kind; nothing that taxes his mind or stimulates; poor feeble Philip for instance, who is precisely like an Eton boy in an Eton jacket: give him an ice 6k a sovereign.
"Them's his words"—this reminds me I must get back to D. Copper-

field.18 There are moments when all the masterpieces do no more than strum upon broken strings. It is very rare—the right mood for reading— in its way as intense a delight as any; but for the most part pain.
Thursday 18 June
No, Lytton does not like Mrs Dalloway, &, what is odd, I like him all the better for saying so, & don't much mind. What he says is that there is a discordancy between the ornament (extremely beautiful) & what happens (rather ordinary—or unimportant). This is caused he thinks by some discrepancy in Clarissa herself; he thinks she is disagreeable & limited, but that I alternately laugh at her, & cover her, very remarkably, with myself. So that I think as a whole, the book does not ring solid; yet, he says, it is a whole; & he says sometimes the writing is of extreme beauty. What can one call it but genius? he said! Coming when, one never can tell. Fuller of genius, he said than anything I had done. Perhaps, he said, you have not yet mastered your method. You should take something wilder & more fantastic, a frame work that admits of anything, like Tristram Shandy. But then I should lose touch with emotions, I said. Yes, he agreed, there must be reality for you to start from. Heaven knows how you're to do it. But he thought me at the beginning, not at the end. And he said the CR. was divine, a classic; Mrs D. being, I fear, a flawed stone. This is very personal, he said & old fashioned perhaps; yet I think there is some truth in it. For I remember the night at Rodmell when I decided to give it up, because I found Clarissa in some way tinselly. Then I invented her memories. But I think some distaste for her persisted. Yet, again, that was true to my feeling for Kitty,19 & one must dislike people in art without its mattering, unless indeed it is true that certain characters detract from the importance of what happens to them. None of this hurts me, or depresses me. Its odd that when Clive & others (several of them) say it is a masterpiece, I am not much exalted; when Lytton picks holes, I get back into my working fighting mood, which is natural to me. I T I      th H          don't see myself a success. I like the sense of effort
sold about is 50      better. The sales collapsed completely for 3 days; now a little dribble begins again. I shall be more than pleased if we sell 1500. Its now 1250.

Saturday 27 June
A bitter cold day, succeeding a chilly windy night, in which were lit all the Chinese lanterns of Roger's garden party. And I do not love my kind. I detest them. I pass them by. I let them break on me like dirty rain drops. No longer can I summon up that energy which when it sees one of these dry little sponges floating past, or rather stuck on the rock, sweeps round them, steeps them, infuses them, nerves them, & so finally fills them & creates them. Once I had a gift for doing this, & a passion, & it made parties arduous & exciting. So when I wake early now I luxuriate most in a whole day alone; a day of easy natural poses, a little printing, slipping tranquilly off into the deep water of my own thoughts navigating the underworld; & then replenishing my cistern at night with Swift. I am going to write about Stella & Swift for Richmond, as a sign of grace, after sweeping guineas off the Vogue counter. The first fruit of the CR. (a book too highly praised now) is a request to write for the Atlantic Monthly.20 So I am getting pushed into criticism. It is a great stand by—this power to make large sums by formulating views on Stendhal & Swift.
Jack dined here last night; & we said how many years is it since we three were alone in a room together? he & Nessa & I, waiting for dinner, & a little nervous.21 I'm more nervous of these encounters than she is. She has a sweet cordiality (odd term to use) which impressed me, recalling mother, as she led him on; & laughed; so sincere, so quiet, & then, when we went on to Roger's rather dismal gathering, gay & spirited, kissing Chrissie & flirting with Mrs Anrep, so careless & casual & white-haired— but enough of this.22 The truth is I am too random headed to describe Jack, yet he is worth describing. He made us laugh of course. He said such Wallerish things. "There are two kinds of biography, my dear Ginia"—in his old opinionative sententious way with enormous emphasis. He is red-copper coloured, with a pouch under his chin which rests on his collar; trusty brown eyes, a little hazy now, & one ear deaf, he said,

& proceeded to tell us how he is cured by a Swiss every year, & gives the Nuns who keep the clinic a box of chocolates, which they love, being underfed. He looks in at the window & sees them handing the box round, & picking in turn. Then he told us, driving back from Roger's—I insist upon paying this taxi my dear Leonard—how he sugared for moths last summer & caught perhaps 150—& the man he was with (on a fishing club) left his electric light on & the moths came & sat on the curtain. He exaggerates, illuminates, appreciates everyone very generously. L. thinks he "might become a bit ofa bore". Then we discussed his writing an autobiography: upon which he became very intent, & almost emotional. "But could one tell the truth? About one's affairs with women? About one's parents? My mother now—she was a very able woman—we all owe her an awful lot—but hard." She said an odd thing to Nessa once— that she hated girls, especially motherless girls. "There you go very deep— It was the terror of her life—that she was losing her charm. She would never have a girl in the house. It was a tragedy. She was a very selfish woman."23 (But while I try to write, I am making up "To the Lighthouse"—the sea is to be heard all through it. I have an idea that I
will invent a new name for my books to supplant "novel". A new-------
by Virginia Woolf. But what? Elegy?)
Sunday 19 July
By bringing this book down here to the Studio, I have rather stinted it I think, as my mornings have all been spent writing—Swift or letters. So a whole tribe of people & parties has gone down the sink to oblivion1 —Ott's parties & complaints; Gwen Raverat set sturdy dusty grim black, yesterday; Tom hedging a little over the Bank; Sybil Colefax drinking tea & protesting her desire to give up parties; her party when Olga Lynn dropped her music in a rage & had to be pacified by Balfour;2 & Ott lost

her shawl; & the garden was lit like a stage, & Clive & Mary could be seen to the least eyelash; & so home to bed; 6k Mrs Asquith, Lady Oxford, called me the most beautiful woman in the room, which compliment was repeated to me the next night (so thick have parties been) by Jack Hutch. at Dadie's, where there were many faces again, & drink, & again home to bed; & then little Eddie Sackville-West & Julian Morrell to dine (& I am to have his piano) & Philip in to fetch her; & then a party at Ott's with Ching playing the piano; & the news of Hew Anderson's death there broken to Angus;3 & Murphy going; & Mrs Cartwright coming; & my books—oh yes, the Calendar has abused Mrs D. which hurt me a little; & then the tide of praise has flowed over me again, & they both sell well, & my fears were ungrounded; & Maynard has brought us a pamphlet, wh. is called The Economic Consequences of Mr Churchill, & we are having 10,000 printed for Monday week to sell at a shilling.4
On Friday I went on a' river party & we dined at Formosa, 6k Eddie [Sackville-West] played in the round drawing room, & there was George Young in a punt.5 Not a moments reflection has gone to any of these statements; but I take them together, never knowing what withered straw doesn't vivify the whole bunch of flowers. They have shone bright & gay this summer in the incessant heat. For the first time for weeks I sit by a fire, but then I am in the thinnest silk dress; & for once, it is watery & windy though I see blue sky through my skylight. A happy summer, very busy; rather overpowered by the need of seeing so many people. I never ask a soul here; but they accumulate. Tonight Ottoline; Tuesday Jack Hutch; Wednesday Edith Sitwell, Friday dine with Raymond. These are my fixed invitations; 6k all sorts of unforseen ones will occur. I run out after tea as if pursued. I mean to regulate this better

in future. But I dont think ofthe future, or the past, I feast on the moment. This is the secret of happiness; but only reached now in middle age.
Monday 20 July
Here the door opened, & Morgan came in to ask us out to lunch with him at the Etoile, which we did, though we had a nice veal 6k ham pie at home (this is in the classic style of journalists).6 It comes of Swift perhaps, the last words of which I have just written, & so fill up time here.
I should consider my work list now. I think a little story, perhaps a review, this fortnight; having a superstitious wish to begin To the Lighthouse the first day at Monks House. I now think I shall finish it in the two months there. The word 'sentimental' sticks in my gizzard (I'll write it out of me in a story—Ann Watkins of New York is coming on Wednesday to enquire about my stories).7 But this theme may be sentimental; father & mother & child in the garden: the death; the sail to the lighthouse. I think, though, that when I begin it I shall enrich it in all sorts of ways; thicken it; give it branches & roots which I do not perceive now. It might contain all characters boiled down; 6k childhood; 6k then this impersonal thing, which I'm dared to do by my friends, the flight of time, 6k the consequent break of unity in my design. That passage (I conceive the book in 3 parts: 1. at the drawing room window; 2. seven years passed; 3. the voyage:) interests me very much. A new problem like that breaks fresh ground in ones mind; prevents the regular ruts.
Last night Clive dined with us; 6k Nelly is rather waspish about it this morning; 6k tried to run away before Ottoline came; but it proved to be Adrian; 6k then we talked of cancer, 6k Clive got set, 6k Ottoline came, in tea kettle taffeta, all looped 6k scolloped 6k fringed with silver lace, 6k talked about Rupert 6k Jacques, 6k re-told, with emendations, the story of Ka 6k Henry Lamb 6k herself.8 She has been working over these old stories so often, that they hold no likeness to the truth—they are stale, managed, pulled this way 6k that, as we used to knead 6k pull the

crumb of bread, till it was a damp slab. Then the old motor was heard hooting 6k there was Philip 6k Julian [Morrell], at which, at Julian that is, Clive cheered up, 6k was very brisk 6k obliging as he knows how. We argued the case of the aristocracy v. the middle class. I rather liked it. But one seldom says anything very profound. I like the sense of other people liking it, as I suppose the Morrells do, for they settle on us like a cloud of crows, once a week now. My vanity as a hostess is flattered. Sometimes a buttery crumb of praise is thrown to me—"Lady Desborough admires your books enormously—wants to meet you"—6k then Clive, looking at my photographs in Vogue says of the one last year—"That is charming—but must be taken very long ago, I suppose"9—so you see how I switch back from pleasure to pain, 6k time was when I should have ended the evening fast stuck in black despair, gone to bed like a diver with pursed lips shooting into oblivion. But enough, enough—I coin this little catchword to control my tendency to flower into phrase after phrase. Some are good though.
What shall I read at Rodmell? I have so many books at the back of my mind. I want to read voraciously 6k gather material for the Lives of the Obscure—which is to tell the whole history of England in one obscure life after another. Proust I should like to finish. Stendhal, 6k then to skirmish about hither 6k thither. These 8 weeks at Rodmell always seem capable of holding an infinite amount. Shall we buy the house at Southease? I suppose not.
Thursday 30 July
I am intolerably sleepy 6k annulled, 6k so write here. I do want indeed to consider my next book, but I am inclined to wait for a clearer head. The thing is I vacillate between a single 6k intense character of father; 6k a far wider slower book—Bob T. telling me that my speed is terrific, 6k destructive.10 My summer's wanderings with the pen have I think shown me one or two new dodges for catching my flies. I have sat here, like an improviser with his hands rambling over the piano. The result is perfectly inconclusive, 6k almost illiterate. I want to learn greater quiet, & force. But if I set myself that task, don't I run the risk of falling into the flatness of N[ight]. 6k D[ay].? Have I got the power needed if quiet

is not to become insipid. These questions I will leave, for the moment, unanswered.
I should here try to sum up the summer, since August ends a season, spiritual as well as temporal. Well; business has been brisk. I don't think I get many idle hours now, the idlest being, oddly enough, in the morning. I have not forced my brain at its fences; but shall, at Rodmell. When the dull sleep of afternoon is on me, I'm always in the shop, printing, dissing addressing; then it is tea, 6k Heaven knows we have had enough visitors. Sometimes I sit still & wonder how many people will tumble on me without my lifting a finger: already, this week, uninvited, on the verge of the holidays too, have come Mary, Gwen, Julian & Quentin, Geoffrey Keynes, & Roger. Meanwhile we are dealing with Maynard. All Monday Murphy & I worked like slaves till 6 when I was stiff as a coal heaver. We get telegrams 6k telephones; I daresay we shall sell our 10,000. On Tuesday at 12.30 Maynard retires to St Pancras Registry office with Lydia, 6k Duncan to witness (against his will.) So that episode is over.11 But, dear me, I'm too dull to write, 6k must go 6k fetch Mr Dobree's novel 6k read it, I think.12 Yet I have a thousand things to say. I think I might do something in To the Lighthouse, to split up emotions more completely. I think I'm working in that direction.
The Woolfs went to Monks House on the afternoon of Wednesday, 5 August. On Sunday 16 August they lunched with the newly-married Keyneses at Iford where they had rented a house; and on Wednesday 19 August they bicycled to Charleston for tea and dinner, it being Quentin s fifteenth birthday. The Keyneses were there too. During dinner VW fainted and was taken home by car, and remained in a delicate state of health for some time to come.
Saturday 5 September
And why couldn't I see or feel that all this time I was getting a little used up 6k riding on a flat tire? So I was, as it happened; 6k fell down in a faint at Charleston, in the middle of Q.'s birthday party: 6k then have lain about here, in that odd amphibious life of headache, for a fortnight. This has rammed a big hole in my 8 weeks which were to be stuffed so

full. Never mind. Arrange whatever pieces come your way. Never be unseated by the shying of that undependable brute, life, hag ridden as she is by my own queer, difficult nervous system. Even at 43 I dont know its workings, for I was saying to myself, all the summer, "I'm quite adamant now. I can go through a tussle of emotions peaceably that two years ago even, would have raked me raw."
I have made a very quick 6k flourishing attack on To the Lighthouse, all the same—22 pages straight off in less than a fortnight. I am still crawling 6k easily enfeebled, but if I could once get up steam again, I believe I could spin it off with infinite relish. Think what a labour the first pages of Dalloway were! Each word distilled by a relentless clutch on my brain.
I took up the pen meaning to write on "Disillusionment". I have never had any illusion so completely burnt out of me as my illusion about the Richmonds.1 This they effected between 4 6k 6 yesterday. But Elena has no beauty, no charm, no very marked niceness even! Any country parsons wife is her match. Her nose is red, her cheeks blowsed: her eyes without character. Even her voice 6k movements which used to be adorable, her distinction, her kindly charm—all have vanished; she is a thick, dowdy, obliterated woman, who has no feelings, no sympathies, prominences 6k angles are all completely razed bare. Seriously, one has doubts for her complete mental equipment. The conversation was practically imbecile: for instance: (E). I think I could get very fond of a house. But we are so lucky. There are some delightful people near. People who like the same sort of things we do. (B). We are very lucky. There are two fellows within 4 miles who were at Winchester with me. One went to Ceylon as a tea planter. They both farm now. Are you lucky in your clergyman? So much depends in the country on one's clergyman. (E). I really forget anything more from the lips of E. I believe it was all the same: how she would like a house with a piano: 6k they mean to retire 6k buy a house with a piano. She sees flowers, dogs, houses, people with the same quiet, stolid, almost coarse, at any rate dull indifference. Her hands are thick. She has a double chin. She wears a long American looking blueish coat, with a nondescript dowdy scarf, a white blouse, fastened with a diamond lizard—oh the colourlessness, drabness, 6k coldness of her personality—she whom I used to think arch 6k womanly 6k comforting! She is white haired too. Bruce is completely

circular: round head, eyes, nose, paunch, mind. You can't stop him rolling from thing to thing. He never stops, he glides smoothly. It would shock him to mention writing, money, or people. All has to be dissolved in slang & kindliness.
Now the curious thing was that these qualities infected us both to such an extent that we were acutely miserable. I have sometimes felt the same when walking in the suburbs. Castello Avenue made me angry like this once.2 As for L. he was indignant. That human nature should sink so low, he said; & then that people should lead such aimless evil lives— the most despicable he could imagine. They took the colour, the sting, the individuality out of everything. And to think that I have ever wasted a thought upon what that goodtempered worldly little grocer thought of my writing! But E. is the great disillusionment. Partly on Thoby's account, partly through my own susceptibility to certain shades of female charm, I had still some glow at the thought of her. Now that glow is replaced by a solid tallow candle. And I feel, this morning, having pitched into bed exhausted, physically worn out, mentally bankrupt, scraped; whitewashed, cleaned. An illusion gone.
Monday 14 September3
A disgraceful fact—I am writing this at io in the morning in bed in the little room looking into the garden, the sun beaming steady, the vine leaves transparent green, & the leaves of the apple tree so brilliant that, as I had my breakfast, I invented a little story about a man who wrote a poem, I think, comparing them with diamonds, & the spiders webs (which glance & disappear astonishingly) with something or other else: which led me to think of Marvell on a country life, so to Herrick, & the reflection that much of it was dependent upon the town & gaiety—a reaction. However, I have forgotten the facts. I am writing this partly to test my poor bunch of nerves at the back of my neck—will they hold or give again, as they have done so often?—for I'm amphibious still, in bed & out of it; partly to glut my itch ('glut' and 'itch'!) for writing. It is the great solace, & scourge. Leonard is in London this solitary perfect day; this day of the peculiar September mintage; talking to Murphy in the basement, while the vans rumble by, & peoples skirts & trousers appear at the top of the area. This leads us to think of selling Monks, & spending our summers, quit of Press, quit of Nelly, quit of Nation, quit

of polar blasts, in the South of France. The news that Mr Wilkinson is
longing to buy Monks shakes our resolution to sell it.4 A walk, in pearly
mottled weather, on the marshes, plunges me in love again. Leonard then
finds his potato crop good, & his autumn crocuses rising. We have been
in the throes of the usual servant crisis—varied this time it is true: Nelly
says Lottie wants to come back; we offer to have her; she denies it—to
Karin; to Nelly she prevaricates. I was flung into a passion with Karin,
& so precipitated another headache. But we are on the laps of the Gods:
we don't intend to raise a finger either way. Only it is a curious reflection
that a little strain with servants more effectually screws the nerves at the
back of the head than any other I am aware of. Now why? It is because
it is subterranean, partly.
Tom has treated us scurvily, much in the manner that he has treated
the Hutchinsons. On Monday I get a letter that fawns & flatters, implores
me to write for his new 4ly; & proposes to discuss press matters as soon
as we get back; on Thursday we read in the Lit.
Supt, that his new firm is publishing Waste Land    Sept 23rd) that o  , .       ,                      r        1 • 1   1      1      1           Read is being asked to
& his other poems—a fact which he dared not    witfi for To*,,, Press
confess, but sought to palliate by flattering me.
He treated Jack in the same way over Vivien's story in the Criterion? The Underworld—the dodges & desires of the Underworld, its shifts & cabals are at the bottom of it. He intends to get on by the methods of that world; & my world is really not the underworld. However, there is a kind of fun in unravelling the twists 6k obliquities of this remarkable man. How far will they make his poetry squint? Anyhow, at my age, without illusions of that sort any more—I mean in the greatness of Tom, or the greatness of any of us, or our power to influence each other intellectually—I remain detached, & composed. Plenty of other illusions remain to me—emotional, personal; the pleasures of inventing Wednesday walks this winter is now uppermost. I'm going to Greenwich, to Caen Woods, to Gunnersbury, all in the dripping autumn weather, with tea at an

A.B.C. & home to a hot bath.6 Really I am going to let myself slacken in social ways: instead of feeling that I shirk a hedge, in refusing Lord Berners or Lady Colefax, I am going to allow myself to do so approvingly;7 saying that I strengthen a paragraph in The Lighthouse thereby, or add another hour to the shabby crony talk which I love best. Not but what I shall dip here & there; but without anxiety or preparation of clothes or any of that struggle. This gives me a delicious sense of ease. And I have earned it, too, for I spread my £35 dress allowance to its furthest, & braved many a party spartanly 'on principle' as the marmots would say. The 'principle' which I find intermittently guiding my life is—to take one's fences. Heaven knows how I've dreaded them! Now, with my Studio habitable, & another servant perhaps, I shall aim at haphazard, bohemian meetings, music (we have the algraphone, & thats a heavenly prospect—music after dinner while I stitch at my woolwork—I go to Lewes this afternoon to meet Nessa & buy wools8) people of our own standard dropping in; ease, slippers, smoke, buns, chocolate. For I'm naturally sociable; it cannot be denied.
Tuesday 22 September
How my handwriting goes down hill! Another sacrifice to the Hogarth Press. Yet what I owe the Hogarth Press is barely paid by the whole of my handwriting. Haven't I just written to Herbert Fisher refusing to do a book for the Home University Series on Post Victorian?9—knowing

that I can write a book, a better book, a book off my own bat, for the Press if I wish! To think of being battened down in the hold of those University dons fairly makes my blood run cold. Yet I'm the only woman in England free to write what I like. The others must be thinking of series' & editors. Yesterday I heard from Harcourt Brace that Mrs D. & CR. are selling 148 & 73 weekly—Isn't that a surprising rate for the 4th month? Doesn't it portend a bathroom & a w.c. either here, or Southease? I am writing in the watery blue sunset, repentance of an ill tempered morose day, which vanished, the clouds, I have no doubt, showing gold over the downs, & leaving a soft gold fringe on the top there.
Today is
Thursday 24 September
—sad to think a week only left whole of this partially wrecked summer; however, I don't complain, seeing as how I have dipped my head in health again & feel stabilised once more about the spinal cord, which is always the centre of my being. Maynard & Lydia came here yesterday— M. in Tolstoi's blouse & Russian cap of black astrachan—A fair sight, both of them, to meet on the high road!10 An immense good will & vigour pervades him. She hums in his wake, the great mans wife. But though one could carp, one can also find them very good company, & my heart, in this the autumn of my age, slightly warms to him, whom I've known all these years, so truculently pugnaciously, & unintimately. We had very brisk talk of Russia: such a hotch-potch, such a mad jumble, M. says, of good & bad, & the most extreme things that he can make no composition of it—can't yet see how it goes. Briefly, spies everywhere, no liberty of speech, greed for money eradicated, people living in common, yet some, L[ydia]'s mother for instance with servants, peasants contented because they own land, no sign of revolution, artistocrats acting showmen to their possessions, ballet respected, best show of
of the Board of Education in Lloyd George's coalition government from 1916 to 1922, and was still a Liberal MP; he was appointed Warden of New College, Oxford, in 1925 and gave up his seat in 1926. io. Early in September the Keyneses had gone to Russia, officially for Maynard to attend the bicentenary celebrations of the Academy of Sciences in Leningrad as the representative of the University of Cambridge, and unofficially, to visit Lydia's family. His reactions to the Soviet regime were recorded in three articles in the N & A, subsequently published as a Hogarth Press pamphlet A Short View of Russia in December 1925 (HP Checklist 67).

Cezanne & Matisse in existence. Endless processions of communists in top hats, prices exorbitant, yet champagne produced, & the finest cooking in Europe, banquets beginning at 8.30 & going on till 2.30; people getting slightly drunk, say about 11, & wandering round the table. Kalinin getting up, & perambulating followed by a little crowd who clapped him steadily as he walked; then the immense luxury of the old Imperial trains; feeding off the Tsars plate; interview with Zinoviev who (I think) was a suave cosmopolital Jew, but had two fanatical watch dogs with square faces, guarding him, & mumbling out their mysteries, fanatically. One prediction of theirs, to the effect that in 10 years time the standard of living will be higher in Russia than it was before the war, but in all other countries lower, M. thought might very well come true. Anyhow they are crammed & packed with sights & talks: Maynard has a medal set in diamonds, & L. a gold sovereign wh. she was allowed to take from the bags at the mint.11
But the Keynes', I need hardly say, renewed my headache, & when Lytton came, I was drooping over the fire, & could not do much battle with that old serpent. What was said I think was to the effect that he had had a fire at Hamspray, which blistered the wall, but did not touch his books—& what fire could have the heart to do that? Then he had read Bunny "Really its very extraordinary—so arty,—so composed— the competence terrific, but... well, its like a perfectly restored Inn—Ye Olde .. . everything tidied up & restored." No Bunny in it, as there were signs of being in The Man in the Zoo; no humour; a perfect restoration.12
But to tell the truth, I am exacerbated this morning. It is 10.25, on a fine grey still day; Lily is doing my bedroom; the starlings are in the apple tree; Leonard is in London, & Nelly I suppose is settling the greatest question of her whole life—what marriage is to a woman—with Lottie. Lily is a wide eyed sheep dog girl who comes from Iford to

'do'; but can't scramble an egg or bake a potato, & is thus ill armed for life, so far as I can see.
Beginning at 9.45 I wrote two pages of a story, as a test again; 6k passed it well, I think, anyhow my cistern is full of ideas. But to the point: why am I exacerbated? By Roger. I told him I had been ill all the summer. His reply is—silence as to that; but plentiful descriptions of his own front teeth. Egotism, egotism—it is the essential ingredient in a clever man's life I believe. It protects; it enhances; it preserves his own vital juices entire by keeping them banked in. Also I cannot help thinking that he suspects me of valetudinarianism & this enrages me: & L. is away & I cant have my thorn picked out by him, so must write it out. There! it is better now; & I think I hear the papers come; &will get them, my woolwork, & a glass of milk.
[Wednesday 30 September]
This was I suppose successfully accomplished; & it is now Wednesday morning, damp & close & over all the sense already of transmigration, of shedding one habit for another. My autumn coat is grown. I begin to sympathise with Nelly's longing for the ease & speed of civilisation. But I vow here not to be misled into thinking this is life—this perpetual frenzy & stretch; or I shall again be deposited in a heap, as I was in August.
Today we are on Tom's track, riddling & reviling him. He won't let Read off that book, has been after him 3 or 4 months.13 Dignity is our line; & really, as far as the poaching of authors goes, he won't harm us. Then there is the fascination of a breach; I mean, after feeling all this time conscious of something queer about him, it is more satisfactory to have it on the surface. Not that I want a breach: what I want is a revelation. But L. thinks the queer shifty creature will slip away now.
I actually forgot to record the finish of the Lottie drama—she's in love with the cowman at Thorpe [-le-Soken]! This emerged after an hours violent argument with Nelly. This explains 6k excuses all: 6k we are, for private reasons, thoroughly content. What is worse, is poor unfortunate Karin—in operating, they cut a nerve in her face, which is

half paralysed. She can't speak, I gather, without being all screwed up.14 She refuses to see the children for fear of frightening them. This final malignancy on the part of fate seems to me her knock out blow; save that somehow she will, I suppose, find a way round, as people mostly do. This softens the heart towards her. It makes one think of her courage. But how quickly the intense feeling of sympathy passes, & she resumes her place in ones mind as a person one is conscious of being permanently, dully, sorry for. But then propinquity will revive it: Tavistock Sqre, being next door, will make one more conscious of the horror of screwing up one's own face.
The Woolfs returned to Tavistock Square on Friday 2 October; by Monday VW felt so unwell that her doctor, Elinor Rendel, was sent for, and for the rest of this month and most of November she was more or less ill, in and out of bed, with occasional walks or drives with L W and seeing a very limited number of visitors. She managed to write On Being 111, for T. S. Eliot's New Criterion, and a few reviews for the Nation & Athenaeum.
Friday zj November
Oh what a blank! I tumbled into bed on coming back—or rather Ellie tumbled me; & keeps me still prostrate half the day.1 Next week I shall go to the ballet, my first night out. One visitor a day. Till 2 days ago, bed at 5. So visitors have become as usual, pictures hung on the wall. On the whole, I have not been unhappy; but not very happy; too much discomfort; sickness, (cured by eating instantly); a good deal of rat-gnawing at the back of my head; one or two terrors; then the tiredness of the body—it lay like a workman's coat. Sometimes I felt old, & spent. Madge died. Rustling among my emotions, I found nothing better than dead leaves. Her letters had eaten away the reality—the brilliancy, the warmth. Oh detestable time, that thus eats out the heart & lets the body go on. They buried a faggot of twigs at Highgate, as far as I am concerned.

I drove to the gate, & saw Nessa & Leonard, like a pair of stuffed figures, go in.2
My walks are extended to Oxford Street; only once so far; & then what about talks. Vita has been twice. She is doomed to go to Persia; & I minded the thought so much (thinking to lose sight of her for 5 years) that I conclude I am genuinely fond of her.3 There is the glamour of unfamiliarity to reckon with; of aristocracy (Raymond says, But she's half a peasant—) of flattery. All the same, after sifting & filing, much, I am sure, remains. Shall I stay with her? Shall we go to Charleston for Christmas? The best of these illnesses is that they loosen the earth about the roots. They make changes. People express their affection. Nessa wants to have us— Indeed, I have seen more of her & Duncan than for many a day. Gwen [Raverat] comes in: threatens to dissolve, her hearty direct stodgy manner in floods of tears, as if the rivets that hold her must give way—such tragedies have beaten her, together for the moment; but suddenly she will break down & tell me something that she has not told anyone. She finds me understanding. And I suppose she is in love—or Marchand in love—6k I don't altogether want to hear it.4
Reading & writing go on. Not my novel though. And I can only think of all my faults as a novelist & wonder why I do it—a wonder which Lytton increases, & Morgan decreases. Morgan is writing an article on me.5 This may be very helpful. It may shove me off again. Then I want to write 'a book' by which I mean a book of criticism for the H.P. But on what? Letters? Psychology? Lytton is off: The Loves of

the Famous. Q. Elizabeth &c. I thought him at his most intimate last
night; all plumy, incandescent, soft, luminous. Something slightly repels
(too strong) Leonard. His character is not so good as Morgan's, he said,
walking round the square in the snow today. "There is something about
all Stracheys—" Then, when we talk, L. & I, we rather crab Lytton's
writing I observe. But all this vanishes, with me, when he comes, as
yesterday, to talk, & talk, & talk. That Nessa is still most beautiful—
that comes over me. That Ka is thinner—& very self conscious: but
nothing, in my sentimental heart, can stand against these old loyalties. I
cannot keep my wits altogether about me in talk. I begin to glitter &
englobe people with a champagne mist. And then it fades. I was talking
of this to Raymond—whose blunt nose & flashy clothes are, I think, one's
chief grudge against him—the other day. That there is no substance in
ones friendships, that they fade like—For instance,
* A shrewd guess—    did he r         Harold rNicoison] in persia?* Nothing
he does regret          ,.,           r   .           , L0   , c  c             .          ,        °
Harold in Persia              a coln 1S struc'c °* ^e" *or ever m one s Pos"
session. People die; Madge dies, & one cannot beat
up a solitary tear. But then, if 6 people died, it is true that my life would cease: by wh. I mean, it would run so thin that though it might go on, would it have any relish? Imagine Leonard, Nessa Duncan Lytton, Clive Morgan all dead.
Monday 7 December
I want to lie down like a tired child & weep away this life of care— & my diary shall receive me on its downy pillow.1 Most children do not know what they cry for; nor do I altogether. It is 12 o'clock on Monday morning, a very cold day, but sunny, healthy, cheerful. Bells ring downstairs; doors are slammed. I should be in full feather, for after all these drowsy dependent weeks I am now almost quit of it again; & can read & write, & walk a little, & mildly entertain. Well, it is partly that devil Vita. No letter. No visit. No invitation to Long
or woman, s e        Barn. She was up last week, & never came. So many did try to come—             ,              r r    , .        .                         it.
prevented fog &c.      §ood reasons *or this neglect occur to me that 1 rn ashamed to call this a cause for weeping. Only if I do not see her now, I shall not—ever: for the moment for intimacy will be gone, next summer. And I resent this, partly because I like her; partly
i.                                'I could lie down like a tired child,
And weep away the life of care Which I have borne and yet must bear, Till death like sleep might steal on me.'
Shelley, Stanzas Written in Dejection near Naples.


because I hate the power of life to divide. Also, I am vain. Clive will know why Vita did not come to see me. That old rat chased to his hole, there is Tom's postcard about On Being III—an article which I, & Leonard too, thought one of my best: to him characteristic &c: I mean he is not enthusiastic; so, reading the proof just now, I saw wordiness, feebleness, & all the vices in it.2 This increases my distaste for my own writing, & dejection at the thought of beginning another novel. What theme have I? Shan't I be held up for personal reasons? It will be too like father, or mother: &, oddly, I know so little of my own powers. Here is another rat run to earth. So now for news.
We shall spend Xmas at Charleston, which I'm afraid Leonard will not like much. We walked at Hampstead on Saturday. It was very cold— skating everywhere, save there, L. having brought his skates. It had a foggy winter beauty. We went in to Ken Wood (but dogs must be led) & there came to the duelling ground, where great trees stand about, & presumably sheltered the 18th Century swordsmen (how I begin to love the past—I think something to do with my book) & it was here that we discussed Lytton, gravely, like married people. But my God—how satisfactory after, I think 12 years, to have any human being to whom one can speak so directly as I to L.! Well, it was a question of L[ytton]'s change of feeling. He has the faults of a small nature said L. He is ungenerous. He asks, but never gives. But I have always known that— often I have seen the dull eyelid fall over him, if one asked a little too much: some sheath of selfishness that protects him from caring too much, or committing himself uncomfortably. He is cautious. He is a valetudinarian. But—there are, as usual, the other things; & as I say, I have known about Lytton's leathern eyelid since I was 20. Nothing has ever shocked me more, I think. But L. said when they were at Cambridge Lytton was not like that to him. First there was the I[nternationa]l Review: & Lytton refused to write; then Ralph; then never a word of praise for other people.3 Morgan, said Leonard, as we trod back over the

slippery hillocks seeing so little as we talked (& yet all this part of Hampstead recalls Katherine to me—that faint ghost, with the steady eyes, the mocking lips, &, at the end, the wreath set on her hair:4) Morgan has improved. Morgan is I think naturally more congenial to L. than Lytton is. He likes "Sillies"; he likes the dependent simplicity of Morgan & myself. He likes settling our minds, & our immense relief at this. Well, well.5
I am reading The Passage to India; but will not expatiate here, as I must elsewhere. This book for the H.P.: I think I will find some theory about fiction.6 I shall read six novels, & start some hares. The one I have in view, is about perspective. But I do not know. My brain may not last me out. I cannot think closely enough. But I can—if the CR. is a test— beat up ideas, & express them now without too much confusion. (By the way, Robert Bridges likes Mrs Dalloway: says no one will read it; but it is beautifully written, & some more, which L. who was told by Morgan, cannot remember.7)
I don't think it is a matter of 'development' but something to do with prose & poetry, in novels. For instance Defoe at one end: E. Bronte' at the other. Reality something they put at different distances. One would have to go into conventions; real life; & so on. It might last me—
his character and behaviour together with Lytton's covert promotion of his interests had been a source of increasing irritation to them. See II VW Diary, passim.

this theory—but I should have to support it with other things. And death—as I always feel—hurrying near. 43: how many more books?
Katie came here;8 a sort of framework of discarded beauty hung on a battered shape now. With the firmness of the flesh, & the blue of the eye, the formidable manner has gone. I can see her as she was at 22 H[yde] P[ark] G[ate] 25 years ago: in a little coat & skirt; very splendid; eyes half shut; lovely mocking voice; upright; tremendous; shy. Now she babbles along.
"But no duke ever asked me, my dear Virginia. They called me the Ice Queen.
And why did I marry Cromer? I loathed Egypt; I loathed invalids. I've had two very happy times in my life—childhood—not when I grew up—but later, with my boys club, my cottage, & my chow—& now. Now I have all I want. My garden—my dog."
I don't think her son enters in very largely. She is one of these cold eccentric great Englishwomen, enormously enjoying her rank, & the eminence it lends her in St John's Wood, & now free to poke into all the dusty holes & corners, dressed like a charwoman, with hands like one, & finger nails clotted with dirt. She never stops talking. She lacks much body to her. She has almost effused in mist. But I enjoyed it. Though I think she has few affections, & no very passionate interests. Now, having cried my cry, & the sun coming out, to write a list of Christmas presents. Ethel Sands comes to tea.9 But no Vita.
Monday 21 December
But no Vita! But Vita for 3 days at Long Barn, from which L. & I returned yesterday.10 These Sapphists love women; friendship is never untinged with amorosity. In short, my fears & refrainings, my 'impertinence' my usual self-consciousness in intercourse with people who mayn't want me & so on—were all, as L. said, sheer fudge; &, partly

thanks to him (he made me write) I wound up this wounded & stricken year in great style. I like her & being with her, & the splendour—she shines in the grocers shop in Sevenoaks with a candle lit radiance, stalking on legs like beech trees, pink glowing, grape clustered, pearl hung. That is the secret of her glamour, I suppose. Anyhow she found me incredibly dowdy, no woman cared less for personal appearance—no one put on things in the way I did. Yet so beautiful, &c. What is the effect of all this on me? Very mixed. There is her maturity & full breastedness: her being so much in full sail on the high tides, where I am coasting down backwaters; her capacity I mean to take the floor in any company, to represent her country, to visit Chatsworth, to control silver, servants, chow dogs; her motherhood (but she is a little cold & offhand with her boys11) her being in short (what I have never been) a real woman. Then there is some voluptuousness about her; the grapes are ripe; & not reflective. No. In brain & insight she is not as highly organised as I am. But then she is aware of this, & so lavishes on me the maternal protection which, for some reason, is what I have always most wished from everyone. What L. gives me, & Nessa gives me, & Vita, in her more clumsy external way, tries to give me. For of course, mingled with all this glamour, grape clusters & pearl necklaces, there is something loose fitting. How much, for example, shall I really miss her when she is motoring across the desert? I will make a note on that next year. Anyhow, I am very glad that she is coming to tea today, & I shall ask her, whether she minds my dressing so badly? I think she does. I read her poem; which is more compact, better seen & felt than anything yet of hers.12
Mary's stories, I fear, are bad.13 Dear me—then Roger is in love with H[elen Anrep]. Morgan's article has cheered me very much.14 L. is doing up rubber seals & fur rabbits at the moment. The workmen are hammering, their engines throbbing outside on the hotel. We go down to Charleston tomorrow, not without some trepidation on my part, partly because I shall be hung about with trailing clouds of glory from Long

Barn wh. always disorientates me & makes me more than usually nervous: then I am—altogether so queer in some ways. One emotion succeeds another.15
On 22 December the Woolfs went to Charleston for Christmas, as builders were making alterations to Monks House. Clive and Vanessa Bell and the three children were there; also, until 24th, Roger Fry. Vanessa reported to Duncan Grant (who was with his mother at Twickenham) that they had spent a fascinating evening reading VW's diary recalling early days at 46 Gordon Square, with the four Stephens' very full and 'rather high society' life there. (Berg, 190<5 Diary). VW and Quentin Bell had again collaborated in a squib, called The Messiah, purporting to depict scenes from Clive's life. On Boxing Day Vita Sackville-West came to lunch. LW returned to London on 2jth, and VW followed him on 28th December.


1926

Tuesday 19 January
Vita having this moment (20 minutes ago—it is now 7) left me, what are my feelings? Of a dim November fog; the lights dulled & damped. I walked towards the sound of a barrel organ in Marchmont Street. But this will disperse; then I shall want her, clearly & distinctly. Then not— & so on. This is the normal human feeling, I think. One wants to finish sentences. One wants that atmosphere—to me so rosy & calm. She is not clever; but abundant & fruitful; truthful too. She taps so many sources of life: repose & variety, was her own expression, sitting on the floor this evening in the gaslight. We dined last night at the Ivy with Clive; 6k then they had a supper party, from which I refrained. Oh & mixed up with this is the invigoration of again beginning my novel, in the Studio, for the first time this morning. All these fountains play on my being & intermingle. I feel a lack of stimulus, of marked days, now Vita is gone; & some pathos, common to all these partings; & she has 4 days journey through the snow.

52 Tavistock Square 1926
Monday 8 February
Just back from Rodmell—to use again the stock opening. And I should explain why I've let a month slip perhaps. First, I think, the
57
FEBRUARY 1926
German measles or influenza; next Vita; then, disinclination for any exertion, so that I never made a book till last week. But undoubtedly this diary is established, 6k I sometimes look at it ek wonder what on earth will be the fate of it. It is to serve the purpose of my memoirs. At 60 I am to sit down ek write my life. As rough material for that masterpiece—6k knowing the caprice of my own brain as record reader for I never know what will take my fancy, I here record that I come in to find the following letters waiting me. 1. Ottoline, on that wonderful essay On Being 111. She is doing a cure. 2. A long letter of hysterical flattery from Miss Keiller [Kieffer] who is translating Jacob's Room. 3. a card, showing me her character in an unfavourable light from Miss Ethel Pye, who once met me in an omnibus 6k wishes to take a mask of my head; 4. a letter from Harcourt Brace enclosing cheque from the Forum for 0[n]. B[eing]. 111. 5. a letter asking me to become one ofthe Committee of the English Association; 6. a cutting on Hogarth Essays from the Dial; 7. a note from Clive asking me to dine to meet his brother.11 think this makes me out rather specially important. It is 3 days post. I am rather tired, a little tired, from having thought too much about To the Lighthouse. Never never have I written so easily, imagined so profusely. Murry says my works won't be read in io years time—Well, tonight I get a new edition of the V[oyage]. 0[ut]. from Harcourt Brace—this was published 11 years ago.2

FEBRUARY 1926 Tuesday 23 February
Here is the usual door bell/ 6k I think Gwen came in, 6k I was rather sodden 6k wretched, feeling that I had nothing to give her, 6k she everything to ask. As I foretold, she is enmeshed in a net of fire: that is the truth; loves net; the fiery net of—who was it?—that was scorched to death: 6k hers is more painful than his, 6k more enduring.3 Yet how seldom one envisages what one knows! Her net lies on me; but it does not burn me. And I do little futile kindnesses to her, which are little good to anybody; 6k I don't do them, 6k I feel compunction. Of all this I have little appetite to write, being exacerbated 1. because Nelly won't make marmalade; 2. because a certain function impends; 3. because I can't go, in deference to L.'s wish, to Mortimer's farewell party, 4. because Dadie asked me to tea, 6k I did not go; 5. because—the last because I cannot now remember—a vague dissatisfaction: spring & funerals; yellow lights 6k white blossoms; beautiful black yellow pointed squares—6k so on. Vita is a dumb letter writer, 6k I miss her. I miss the glow 6k the flattery 6k the festival. I miss her, I suppose, not very intimately. Nevertheless, I do miss her, 6k wish it were May 10th; 6k then I don't wish it; for I have such a razor edge to my palette that seeing people often disgusts me of seeing them.4
I am blown like an old flag by my novel. This one is To the Lighthouse. I think it is worth saying for my own interest that at last at last, after that battle Jacob's Room, that agony—all agony but the end, Mrs Dalloway, I am now writing as fast & freely as I have written in the whole of my life; more so—20 times more so—than any novel yet. I think this is the proof that I was on the right path; 6k that what fruit hangs in my soul is to be reached there.5 Amusingly, I now invent theories that fertility 6k fluency are the things: I used to plead for a kind of close, terse, effort. Anyhow this goes on all the morning; & I have the devils own work not to be flogging my brain all the afternoon. I live entirely in it, 6k come to the surface rather obscurely 6k am often unable to think what to say when we walk round the Square, which is bad I know. Perhaps it may be a good sign for the book though. Of course

it is largely known to me: but all my books have been that. It is, I feel, that I can float everything off now; & "everything" is rather a crowd & weight & confusion in the mind.
Then I have seen Lytton: seen Eddy; Mary; I forget: I have been discreet in my society, & enjoyed it. Perhaps I am again brisking, after my lethargy. The publishing season is about to begin. Nessa says Why don't you give it up? I say, because I enjoy it. Then I wonder, but do I? What about Rome & Sicily? And Manning Sanders is not worth the grind.6 Am I a fanatical enthusiast for work, like my father? I think I have a strain of that, but I don't relish it. Tonight Francis Birrell & Rose Macaulay dine with us.7 To celebrate the occasion, I have bought a toast rack & a bedspread, which covers that atrocious chest of drawers wh. has worried me these 2 years. I am now so pleased with the colour that I go out & look at it.
Wednesday 24 February
To continue, the second day running which is a rarity, they came last night, Francis & Rose Macaulay—I daresay I shall be calling her Rose one of these days. Francis didn't much relish meeting her: my gnats of worries gave me little peace: Gwen ringing up; I not cordial; she shying off: I repentant; ringing up again. Then Rose—too chattery chittery at first go off; lean as a rake, wispy, & frittered. Some flimsy smartness & taint of the flimsy glittery literary about her: but this was partly nerves, I think; & she felt us alien & observant doubtless. Anyhow in the middle of dinner the lights went out: only a few candles in saucers to be had, & I left her & Francis alone in the dark to talk. After all, she has no humbug about her; is exactly on a par as far as conventions go, I imagine; only frosted & rather cheaply gilt superficially with all that being asked to speak at dinners, to give opinions to newspapers, & so on; lunching at the League of Nations; dining with Iolo William, meeting Jack Squire who has grown whiskers & looks like a verger.8
Let me see, there's some failure of sympathy between Chiswick & Bloomsbury, I think, she said. So we defined Bloomsbury. Her part is to

stick up for common sense she said. I elaborated her being Cambridge. She is writing an article for an American paper on London after the War.9 It is [this] sort of thing that one distrusts in her. Why should she take the field so unnecessarily? But I fancy our 'leading lady novelists' all do as they are asked about this, 6k I am not quite one of them. I saw my own position, a good deal lowered & diminished; & this is part of the value of seeing new people—still more of going to people's houses. One is, if anything, minimised: here in the eternal Bloomsbury, one is apt, without realising it, to expand. Then Gwen came. I like Francis. I like his laughter; & his random energy. He is a Victorian. Indeed we talked a lot, when L. was in the basement with the electrician, of father, who, said Francis, dominates the 20th Century. "He made it possible for me to have a decent life" he said. "He pulled down the whole edifice, & never knew what he was doing. He never realised that if God went, morality must follow. A remarkable man; for though he would not believe in God, he was stricter than those who did."
"He loved lamentation" said L. coming up. R.M. said her parents called him always "poor Leslie Stephen" because he had lost his faith. Also they said he was very gentle & charming. Gwen said her father & uncles had a great respect for him. They had a very romantic feeling for my mother.10
Because she was so beautiful, I said, proud that R.M. should know this; & felt rather queer, to think how much of this there is in To the Lighthouse, & how all these people will read it & recognise poor Leslie Stephen & beautiful Mrs Stephen in it. Then we talked of knowing people. R.M. said she always knew why she liked people. Gwen being perhaps tired, was a little mystical; or perhaps she has acquired views which are yet hardly articulate. Anyhow Leonard thought her 'almost imbecile'. They got talking about whether one knew more about pictures or books. R.M. showed up rather well in argument, & maintained that a book is a subjective thing; she attacks authority in literature. But people know about painting as it is a more technical art. Then she said (this makes me think she will wish to be called Rose) how she had dreamt she was staying with us in a cottage in Surrey, a 15th century house, full of old beams & candle lit. In some lights she has the beautiful eyes

of all us distinguished women writers; the refinement; the clearness of cut; the patience; & humbleness. It is her voice & manner that make one edgy.
Saturday 27 February
I think I shall initiate a new convention for this book—beginning each day on a new page—my habit in writing serious literature. Certainly, I have room to waste a little paper in this year's book. As for the soul: why did I say I would leave it out? I forget. And the truth is, one can't write directly about the soul. Looked at, it vanishes: but look at the ceiling, at Grizzle, at the cheaper beasts in the Zoo which are exposed to walkers in Regents Park, & the soul slips in. It slipped in this afternoon. I will write that I said, staring at the bison: answering L. absentmindedly; but what was I going to write?11
Mrs Webb's book has made me think a little what I could say of my own life. I read some of 1923 this morning, being headachy again, & taking a delicious draught of silence.12 But then there were causes in her life: prayer; principle. None in mine. Great excitability & search after something. Great content—almost always enjoying what I'm at, but with constant change of mood. I don't think I'm ever bored. Sometimes a little stale; but I have a power of recovery—which I have tested; & am now testing for the 50th time. I have to husband my head still very carefully: but then, as I said to Leonard today, I enjoy epicurean ways of society; sipping & then shutting my eyes to taste. I enjoy almost everything. Yet I have some restless searcher in me. Why is there not a discovery in life? Something one can lay hands on & say "This is it?" My depression is a harassed feeling—I'm looking; but that's not it— thats not it. What is it? And shall I die before I find it? Then (as I was walking through Russell Sqre last night) I see the mountains in the sky: the great clouds; & the moon which is risen over Persia; I have a great & astonishing sense of something there, which is 'it'— It is not exactly beauty that I mean. It is that the thing is in itself enough: satisfactory; achieved. A sense of my own strangeness, walking on the earth is there too: of the infinite oddity of the human position; trotting along Russell Sqre with the moon up there, & those mountain clouds. Who am I,

what am I, & so on: these questions are always floating about in me; & then I bump against some exact fact—a letter, a person, & come to them again with a great sense of freshness. And so it goes on. But, on this showing which is true, I think, I do fairly frequently come upon this 'it'; & then feel quite at rest.
Is that what I meant to say? Not in the least. I was thinking about my own character; not about the universe. Oh & about society again; dining with Lord Berners at Clive's made me think that. How, at a certain moment, I see through what I'm saying; detest myself; & wish for the other side of the moon; reading alone, that is. How many phases one goes through between the soup & the sweet! I want, partly as a writer, to found my impressions on something firmer. I said to Lord B. All you must do in writing is to float off the contents of your mind. Clive & Raymond laughed & said Thats exactly what you do anyhow. And I don't want that to be all. Nor is it. Theres a good deal of shaping & composing in my books. However—the main idea of them is that, then; & I dont like it.
Lord B. was stockish, resolute, quick witted: analysed his own instability. His father was a sea captain; wished him not on any account to be a long haired artist; his mother used to say "My little boy plays so nicely—you should hear him play" but she minded his not hunting & riding. So, he said, he was inhibited as a musician. His talent clung (I think he said) like a creeper to the edge of a cliff. One day he wrote two marches for fun. Stravinsky saw them, thought them good, & they were published. So he was accepted as a serious musician, with only 4 lessons from Tovey in counterpoint. He had an astonishing facility. He could write things that sounded all right. Suddenly, last year, all his pleasure in it went. He met a painter, asked him how you paint; bought 'hogsheads' —(meant hog's bristles) & canvas & copied an Italian picture, brilliantly, consummately, says Clive. Has the same facility there: but it will come to nothing he said, like the other.13
What did we talk about? Tom & the Sitwells; Eddie Marsh & Lady Colefax,14 & I felt one ed. go on saying these things for ever, & they

mean nothing. Sure enough, he asked me to dine: 6k now I say I have a headache & can't.
Wednesday 3 March
And I did have a bit of a headache—yes; all this time is rather weathering headaches. Nailing a flag to a mast in a gale, I have just compared writing a novel in London to that, in a letter to Vita. The glow is off my visit to Herbert & Freda at Cookham: a very memorable day.1 From their windows you look down on the top of old Mr Watkins' bald head skulling on the Thames. You look at two twisted stakes in the river which I took for cranes; & across Marlow to some hills. They motored us up into the hills, & it was oddly strangely still 6k bright 6k empty 6k full of unblown flowers. We saw a Queen Anne house called—I forget; so high 6k remote, with turf to its door; 6k broad alleys; capacious windows, a woman. Well; no one gets more pleasure from these sights than I do; only the wave of pleasure leaves some regret—all this beauty going—going—going: 6k I in Tavistock Sqre not seeing it. And spiritually it was very interesting. I thought I had found the real human being— something so simple 6k fitted to its surroundings as to be almost irreflec-tive, in Freda. She is nearer humanity than I am: eats her way into the heart of it, as I cannot. Her thighs are thick with honey. But the impression is dying, as they do, under others—how I lost my little mother of pearl brooch, bought a 16/ hat which I do not like, 6k must go to tea at Ethel [Sands]'s tomorrow in what then? My own lack of beauty depresses me today. But how far does the old convention about 'beauty' bear looking into? I think of the people I have known. Are they beautiful? This problem I leave unsolved.                          t
Raymond gave a fancy dress party on Sunday night. I was torpid with a sleeping draught; 6k was dozing off, as the carriages arrived at no. 6. Still I envied them; 6k thought, when Raymond telephoned about the copy of Old Kensington which I gave him 6k said how lovely Nancy [Cunard] had looked, that I had missed the greatest sight of the season.2 Happily, Lucas comes to tea, 6k he says he hears it was a terrible sticky dull party, with not room to turn round in, which greatly pleases me. Lucas, Peter, I should call him, came, from friendship; which friendship,

as I suppose, was gently stimulated by my praise of his novel.3 He is a bony rosy little austere priest; so whole, 6k sane, 6k simple throughout one can't help respecting him, though when it comes to books we disagree. He says' Tom 6kc: have thrown intellect to the winds; given up the ghost; he says Houseman 6k de la Mare are the real poets.41 say poetry is defunct; 6k Tom 6kc anyhow try to animate it. The Sitwells, he says, advertise. They're aristocrats, I say, thinking criticism upstart impertinence on the part of flunkeys. No merit in their works anyhow, he says. But what about this drawing room singer, de la Mare, I ask. The most charming of men. Granted. Granted, on Peter's side, that he has no coherency whatever—is always darting after strange monsters—goldfish in bowls, I say. Well, but we cant all be great philosophical poets, he says. Anyhow Tom ain't a drawing room singer, I say. Tom has been down lecturing, 6k not creating a good impression at Cambridge, I fancy.5 He tells the young men, in private, how they cook fish in Paris: his damned selfconsciousness again, I suppose. But Peter is, to my mind, too entire in his judgments; founded on book learning 6k prettiness into the bargain. He has no ascendency of brain: he is not, 6k now never will be, a personage: which is the one thing needful in criticism, or writing of any sort, I think; for we're all as wrong as wrong can be. But character is the thing.
Tuesday 9 March
Then I was at two parties: Ethel's tea; Mary's dinner.
Ethel's was a ghastly frizzly frying pan affair. I chattering in front of the footlights.
Well, said Ott. how are you? You look wonderfully well; as if you had never had an illness in your life.

(Now what does she say that for? To get pity for herself, sure enough.)
I can't say I'm any better.
But she is all dressed like a girl of 18; tomato coloured Georgette &fur.
Ethel says, tittering
What a nice hat.
I'm all windblown in my old felt, come through the snow, with Dadie.
Well, I say to myself, I'll see this through anyhow, take my seat as on a throne, & proceed, first to little smug Leigh Ashton: Read wrote that Times Leader this morning (quoting me & Joyce as examples of good prose versus death of Queen Victoria).6
I should so much like to know if you think its well written—such a
charming man. Then diversion: Ethel; Ottoline: Percy Lubbock.7
Are the Russians more passionate than we are?
No; I say; I have all the passions. Asked to define a dramatic scene; how Leonard says "I think the worse of you for ever" when I accept Ott's invitation. Suddenly I remember it was Ott's invitation. If Mr Lubbock had a daughter he would have scenes—this is sheer egotistical cruelty on Ott's part; so home, holding Dadie by the arm; talking about his fellowship, to be announced on Saturday, (But Peter thinks he won't get it8) & abusing Chelsea, & Ottoline; & saying how unpopular I made myself.
As for Mary's party, there, save for the usual shyness about powder & paint, shoes & stockings, I was happy, owing to the supremacy of literature. This keeps us sweet & sane, George Moore & me I mean.9
He has a pink foolish face; blue eyes like hard marbles; a crest of snowhite hair; little unmuscular hands; sloping shoulders; a high stomach;

neat, purplish well brushed clothes; & perfect manners, as I consider them. That is to say he speaks without fear or dominance; accepting me on my merits; every one on their merits. Still in spite of age uncowed, unbeaten, lively, shrewd. As for Hardy & Henry James though, what shall one say?
"I am a fairly modest man; but I admit I think Esther Waters a better book than Tess."
But what is there to be said for that man? He cannot write. He cannot tell a story. The whole art of fiction consists in telling a story. Now he makes a woman confess. How does he do it? In the third person—a scene that should be moving, impressive. Think how Tolstoi would have done it!
But, said Jack [Hutchinson] War & Peace is the greatest novel in the world. I remember the scene where Natasha puts on a moustache, & Rostov sees her for the first time as she is & falls in love with her.
No, my good friend, there is nothing very wonderful in that. That is an ordinary piece of observation. But my good friend (to me—half hesitating to call me this) what have you to say for Hardy? You cannot find anything to say. English fiction is the worst part of English literature. Compare it with the French—with the Russians. Henry James wrote some pretty little stories before he invented his jargon. But they were about rich people. You cannot write stories about rich people; because, I think he said, they have no instincts. But Henry James was enamoured of marble balustrades. There was no passion in any of his people. And Anne Bronte was the greatest of the Bronte's & Conrad could not write, & so on. But this is out of date.
Saturday 20 March
But what is to become of all these diaries, I asked myself yesterday. If I died, what would Leo make of them? He would be disinclined to burn them; he could not publish them. Well, he should make up a book from them, I think; & then burn the body. I daresay there is a little book in them: if the scraps & scratches were straightened out a little. God knows.
This is dictated by a slight melancholia, which comes upon me sometimes now, & makes me think I am old: I am ugly. I am repeating things. Yet, as far as I know, as a writer I am only now writing out my mind.
Dining with Clive last night to meet Lord Ivor Spencer Churchill— an elegant attenuated gnat like youth; very smooth, very supple, with the semi-transparent face of a flower, & the legs of a gazelle, & the white

waistcoat & diamond buttons of a dandy, & all an Americans desire to understand psycho-analysis—I thought of my own age.101 made a horrid gaffe early on: said I liked a picture, which I did not like, & found I was wrong. Now if I had followed my instinct, as one should do, I should have been right. For some extraordinary reason, this poisoned my evening, slightly. The Lord analysed everything very ingeniously: he is a clever boy. I was greatly impressed by masculine cleverness, & their ability to toss balls swiftly & surely to & fro: no butter fingers; all clean catches. Adrian Bishop came in; a ruddy bull frog;11 & then I went, & Clive, with a discrimination which was affectionate, but not just, apologised, thinking I had not talked enough for my pleasure; whereas I had said the wrong thing, & been depressed over that. Otherwise the evening amused me, & I wanted, like a child, to stay & argue. True, the argument was passing my limits—how if Einstein is true, we shall be able to foretell our own lives. Fortune tellers can now read one's mind exactly according to Lord Ivor, who, by the bye, had read neither Henry James nor V.W., is about 23, & came to the Press this morning, obediently, to buy my complete works. No intellectual would have done that. They are excessively anxious to save their souls—these aristocrats; witness Lord Berners the other night, sending out for Peacock—on my recommendation.
Otherwise, we had Bea Howe to dinner; & went to Philip [Woolf]'s one hot still day of the usual loveliness, & saw the place, 6k the horses, 6k the pepper box towers of Waddesdon, 6k I liked the immense directness 6k uncloudedness of Babs;12 but says Eddy [Sackville-West] who came to tea on Sunday, this is "I assure you" all my imagination. She would be very dull if you knew her. He knows dozens of her. Who is not dull? Only B[loomsbur]'y according to Eddy.
Then there was Sybil Colefax: she comes to heel promptly: no, I won't go there; she may have a little cheap tea here, which she does, gratefully.

She has done America with the usual dashing, joyless efficiency; could not analyse, merely report. Charlie Chaplin such a mixture of subtlety 6k common[n]ess: but why? No instances available, so I infer that she picked this up second hand, perhaps from Esme Howard; perhaps from Coolidge, or from Douglas Fairbanks or from the Italian boy who drove the car. Like a good housewife, which she is, she is making Peter begin life hard, cooking his breakfast, down on Wall Street by 9. There is a strain of hard, serious, professionalism in her, quite unmitigated by all the splendours of Argyll House.13
Wednesday 24 March
"I'm going to hand in my resignation this morning" said L. making the coffee.
To what? I asked.
"The Nation".
And it is done; 6k we have six months only before us. I feel io years younger; the shafts off our shoulders again 6k the world before us. I can't pretend to make much ofa to-do about this either way. It was a temporary makeshift job, amusing at first, then galling, 6k last night, after an argument of the usual kind about literary articles 6k space 6k so on with Maynard 6k Hubert L. came to the decision to resign now. There was no quarrel. Oddly enough, having tea with Nessa, she had set me thinking the same thing. Phil [Noel-]Baker had said to her he thought L. the best living writer, 6k what a pity it was he spent so much time on the Nation 6k the Press. So there was I beginning, don't you think we might give them up! —when L. came in with his contribution to the question. He was dining with Clive, so the discussion waited till this morning; was decided by io; in the hands of the Chief by 11—6k now thank God no more chiefs for either of us so long as we live I hope.14
The situation appears to be that L. shall make £300; I £200—6k really I don't suppose we shall find it hard; 6k then the mercy of having no ties, no proofs, no articles to procure, 6k all that, is worth a little more exertion elsewhere, should it come to that. I'm amused at my own

sense of liberation. To upset everything every 3 or 4 years is my notion of a happy life. Always to be tacking to get into the eye of the wind. Now a prudent life is, as L. pointed out in the Square the opposite of this. One ought to stick in the same place. But with £400 assured & no children, why imitate a limpet in order to enjoy a limpets safety? The next question will be, I see, the Press. Shall we give that up too, & so be quit of everything? Its not such an easy question, or so pressing. I sometimes wish it. For, speaking selfishly, it has served my turn: given me a chance of writing off my own bat, & now I douBt if Heinemann or Cape would much intimidate me. But then there's the fun—which is considerable. The time will come, at this rate, when we have nothing in the world to resign: then, to get the effect of change, one will have to accept. We say we will travel & see the world. Anyhow I make my usual prediction—we shall be richer this time next year without the Nation than with it.
I rather like feeling that I have to earn money. I intensely dislike being in office, in any post of authority. I dislike being in people's pay. This of course is part ofthe reason why I like writing for the Press. But I suppose freedom becomes a fetish like any other. These disjointed reflections I scribble on a divine, if gusty, day; being about, after reading Anna Karenina, to dine at a pot-house with Rose Macaulay—not a cheerful entertainment; but an experience perhaps.                   *
Lydia came into the room when L. was talking to Maynard this morning to show him her Zebra shoes, which cost £5.8.6. & they were really lizard, L. says. Also it is curious how a change like this destroys formality[?]—dissipates the elements.
Saturday 27 March
To continue—I don't know why I should really tell the story of the Nation—it doesn't figure largely in our lives. But Leonard met Phil Baker, who says he will get £300 as lecturer at the School of Economics easily if he wants it. He came in that night & said this & then we went off on a blowing night to dine at Rose M.'s 'pothouse', as I so mistakenly called it. There were io second rate writers in second rate dress clothes, Lynds, Goulds, O'Donovan:15 no, I won't in any spasm of hypocritical

humanity include Wolves. L. by the way was in his red brown tweed. Then the pitter patter began; the old yard was scratched over by these baldnecked chickens. The truth was that we had no interests private; literature was our common ground; & though I will talk literature with Desmond or Lytton by the hour, when it comes to pecking up grains with these active stringy fowls my gorge rises. What d'you think of the Hawthornden prize? Why isn't Masefield as good as Chaucer, or Gerhardi as good as Tchekov: how can I embark with Gerald Gould on such topics? He reads novels incessantly; got a holiday 3 years ago, & prided himself on reading nothing but Tchekhov; knows all about a novel in the first chapter. Sylvias & Geralds & Roberts & Roses chimed & tinkled round the table. A stout woman called Gould got steadily more & more mustard & tomato coloured. I said Holy Ghost? when Mr O'Donovan said the whole of the coast. Lodged on a low sofa in Rose's underground cheerful, sane, breezy room I talked to a young cultivated man, who turned out to be Hinks, Roger, British Museum, mild aesthete, variety of Leigh Ashton; but thank God, not a second rate journalist.16 All the time I kept saying to myself Thank God to be out of that; out of the Nation; no longer brother in arms with Rose & Robert & Sylvia. It is a thinblooded set; so 'nice', 'kind', respectable, cleverish & in the swim.
Then our set at Nessa's last night, was hardly at its best. L. & Adrian silent & satirical; old Sickert rather toothless & set;17 I driven to chatter, not well; but Nessa & Duncan don't consolidate & order these parties; so home in a spasm of outraged vanity, & not that altogether, for I had worked honestly if feebly, & L. had not; & then he was off early this morning to Rodmell where Philcox is in the thick of building & drains:18
Galway, had resigned, travelled, married, published novels and met Rose Macaulay while they were both working in the Ministry of Information towards the end of the war. Their ensuing clandestine love-affair lasted until his death.

so I had no time to uncrease my rose leaf; had to try & work, to finish the rather long drawn out dinner scene [in To the Lighthouse], & was just striking oil when in comes Angus to tell me Eddy was on the phone: would I go to Rimsky Korsakov with him on Tuesday.19 I agreed— more, asked him to dinner. Then was all a whirl & flutter of doubts; detested the engagement; could not settle; suddenly shook my coat, like a retriever; faced facts; sent Eddy a wire, & a letter "Cant come—detest engagements", & pondered where shall I spend the day? decided on Greenwich, arrived there at 1; lunched; everything fell out pat; smoked a cigarette on the pier promenade, saw the ships swinging up, one two, three, out of the haze; adored it all; yes even the lavatory keepers little dog; saw the grey Wren buildings fronting the river; & then another great ship, grey & orange; with a woman walking on deck; & then to the hospital; first to the Museum where I saw Sir John Franklin's pen & spoons (a spoon asks a good deal of imagination to consecrate it)—I played with my mind watching what it would do,—& behold if I didn't almost burst into tears over the coat Nelson wore at Trafalgar with the medals which he hid with his hand when they carried him down, dying, lest the sailors might see it was him. There was too, his little fuzzy pigtail, of golden greyish hair tied in black; & his long white stockings, one much stained, & his white breeches with the gold buckles, & his stock—all of which I suppose they must have undone & taken off as he lay dying. Kiss me Hardy &c—Anchor, anchor,—I (read it all when I came in, & could swear I was there on the Victory— So the charm worked in that case.20 Then it was raining a little, but I went into the Park, which is all prominence & radiating paths; then back on top of a bus, & so to tea. Molly [McCarthy] came, a warm faithful bear, of whom I am really fond, judging from the steady accumulation of my desire to see her these last 3 or 4 weeks, culminating in my asking her to come, as I so rarely ask anyone to come. Saxon came, with his great grandfather's diary, which it pleases him I should like, & call like him;21 & then reading & bed. I think my rose leaf is now uncrumpled. Certainly I shall remember

the ships coming up (here Tomlin rings,22 but I won't see him—solitude is my bride, & she is adulterated by Clive & Mary tonight) & Nelson's coat long after I have forgotten how silly & uncomfortable I was at Nessa's on Friday.
Friday 9 April
Life has been very good to the Leafs.11 should say it has been perfect. Why then all this pother about life? It can produce old Walter, bubbling & chubby; & old Lotta, stately & content; & little Kitty, as good & nice as can be; & handsome Charles, as loving & affectionate. Plunge deep into Walter's life & it is all sound & satisfactory. His son kisses him & says "Bless you father". He sinks back chuckling on his cushions. He chooses a maccaroon. He tells a story. Lotta purrs[?], in her black velvet dress. Only I am exiled from this profound natural happiness. That is what I always feel; or often feel now—natural happiness is what I lack, in profusion. I have intense happiness—not that. It is therefore what I most envy; geniality & family love & being on the rails of human life. Indeed, exaggeration apart, this is a very satisfactory form of existence. And it exists for thousands of people all the time. Why have we none of us got it, in that measure? Old & young agreeing to live together: & being normal; & clever enough of course; yet not stinted or self-conscious in emotion. Much of this may be the generalised 6k harmonious view which one gets of unknown people as a whole. I might not think it if I saw more of them. Writers do not live like that perhaps. But it is useless frittering away the impression which is so strong. Also I keep thinking "They pity me. They wonder what I find in life." Then I sink a little silent, & rouse myself to talk to Kitty. Also I know that nothing Leonard or I have done—not our books or the Press or anything means anything to Lotta & Walter & Charles & very little to Kitty. Charles has his

motor at the door. They are perfectly happy, motoring off to Berk-hamstead, which will take an hour, so they are among the lanes even now. A spring night & so on.
Sunday 11 April
Cannot read Mrs Webb because at any moment S. Tomlin may ring the bell. Also I wanted to go on about the Leafs. I have almost forgotten the impression they made on me. I have wrapped myself round in my own personality again. How does it come about—these sudden intense changes of view? Perhaps my life, writing imagining, is unusually conscious: very vivid to me: & then, going to tea with the Leafs destroys it more completely than other people's lives because my life is saying to itself "This is life—the only life". But when I enter a complete world of its own; where Walter cracks a joke, I realise that this is existing whether I exist or not; & so get bowled over. Violent as they are, these impressions go quickly; leaving a sediment of ideas which I shall discuss with L. perhaps when we go to Iwerne Minster. About natural happiness: how it is destroyed by our way of life.
Mrs Webb's Life makes me compare it with mine. The difference is that she is trying to relate all her experiences to history. She is very rational & coherent. She has always thought about her life & the meaning of the world: indeed, she begins this at the age of 4. She has studied herself as a phenomenon. Thus her autobiography is part of the history ofthe 19th Century. She is the product of science, & the lack of faith in God; she was secreted by the Time Spirit. Anyhow she believes this to be so; & makes herself fit in very persuasively & to my mind very interestingly. She taps a great stream of thought. Unlike that self-conscious poseur Walter Raleigh she is much more interested in facts & truth than in what will shock people 6k what a professor ought not to say.2 Tomlin does not seem to be coming, & L. is at Staines, so I will try a little reading.3

On Tuesday 13 April the Woolfs went by train to Blandford in Dorset, and motored out to the Talbot Inn at Iwerne Minster, where they stayed five nights; for the return journey on the 18th they went by bus to Bournemouth and took the train from there back to Waterloo.
Sunday 18 April (This is written)
This is not written very seriously.—obviously not—to try a pen, I think. And it is now [Friday] April 30th, the last of a wet windy month, excepting the sudden opening of all the doors at Easter, & the summer displayed blazing, as it always is, I suppose; only cloud hidden. I have not said anything about Iwerne Minster. Now it would amuse me to see what I remember it by. Cranbourne Chase: the stunted aboriginal forest trees, scattered, not grouped in cultivations; anemones, bluebells, violets, all pale, sprinkled about, without colour, livid, for the sun hardly shone. Then Blackmore Vale; a vast air dome & the fields dropped to the bottom; the sun striking, there, there; a drench of rain falling, like a veil streaming from the sky, there & there; & the downs rising, very strongly scarped (if that is the word) so that they were ridged & ledged; then an inscription in a church "sought peace & ensured it", & the question, who wrote these sonorous stylistic epitaphs?—& all the cleanliness of Iwerne village, its happiness & well being, making me ask, as we tended to sneer. Still this is the right method, surely; & then tea & cream— these I remember: the hot baths; my new leather coat; Shaftesbury, so much lower & less commanding than my imagination, & the drive to Bournemouth, & the dog & the lady behind the rock, & the view of Swanage, & coming home.
And then it was horror: Nelly; faced her going; was firm yet desolate; on Tuesday she stopped me on the landing said "Please ma'am may I apologise?" & this time we had been so resolute & implicitly believed her that I had written 6 letters. No cooks however came; & I had enough look into the 'servant question' to be glad to be safe again with Nelly. Now I vow come what may, never never to believe her again. "I am too fond of you ever to be happy with anyone else" she said. Talking of compliments, this is perhaps the greatest I could have. But my mind is wandering. It is a question of clothes. This is what humiliates me— talking of compliments—to walk in Regent St, Bond Str ckc: & be notably less well dressed than other people.
Yesterday I finished the first part of To the Lighthouse, & today

began the second. I cannot make it out—here is the most difficult abstract piece of writing—I have to give an empty house, no people's characters, the passage of time, all eyeless & featureless with nothing to cling to: well, I rush at it, & at once scatter out two pages. Is it nonsense, is it brilliance? Why am I so flown with words, & apparently free to do exactly what I like? When I read a bit it seems spirited too; needs compressing, but not much else. Compare this dashing fluency with the excruciating hard wrung battles I had with Mrs Dalloway (save the end). This is not made up: it is the literal fact. Yes, & I am rather famous. For the rest, we dally about the Nation. Maynard, dressed in a light overcoat, is back; hums & haws about standing for the Provost of King's.4 We tell him Lydia would like it. He says it means middle age & respectability. I feel some sympathy for him. This is because he is going grey, I tell Clive. Clive's back; Nessa departing,5 & I worrying about my clothes, & how Roger last night upset me by saying that Nessa finds fault with my temper behind my back. Then (at Ralph's new left handed establishment6) Inez, rather like Vivien [Eliot] to look at, searches into my eyes with her greenish pink-rimmed ones, & says, I must tell you two things: then she tells me that she admires me. That swallowed (doubtfully) she says, Did you ever have an affair with Oliver?7 The connection is this: she disliked me, from jealousy. I protest I never kissed him, & he never looked at me. She refuses to believe. So she has been refusing to believe for years— A queer little interview, stage managed by Oliver* & she: at last brought off. I called in Leonard, & I think convinced her.
* Oliver denied all knowledge of this; & said she invented it in order to have an excuse for an intimate conversation. "So many women are like that" said Rose Macaulay sitting spruce lean, like a mummified cat, in her chair (this is written Aug. 12th)

Wednesday 5 May
An exact diary of the Strike would be interesting.1 For instance, it is now a J to 2: there is a brown fog; nobody is building; it is drizzling. The first thing in the morning we stand at the window & watch the traffic in Southampton Row. This is incessant. Everyone is bicycling; motor cars are huddled lip with extra people. There are no buses. No placards, no newspapers. The men are at work in the road; water, gas & electricity are allowed; but at n the light was turned off. I sat in the press in the brown fog, while L. wrote an article for the Herald. A very revolutionary looking young man on a cycle arrived with the British Gazette. L. is to answer an article in this.2 All was military stern a little secret. Then Clive dropped in, the door being left open. He is offering himself to the Government. Maynard excited, wants the H[ogarth]. P[ress]. to bring out a skeleton number ofthe Nation.3 It is all tedious & depressing, rather like waiting in a train outside a station. Rumours are passed round—that the gas wd. be cut off at 1—false of course. One does not know what to do. And nature has laid it on thick today—fog, rain, cold. A voice, rather commonplace & official, yet the only common voice left, wishes us good morning at 10. This is the voice of Britain, to wh. we can make no reply. The voice is very trivial, & only tells us that the Prince of Wales is coming back {from Biarrit^), that the London streets present an unprecedented spectacle.
Thursday 6 May
(one of the curious effects ofthe Strike is that it is difficult to remember the day of the week). Everything is the same, but unreasonably, or

because of the weather, or habit, we are more cheerful, take less notice, & occasionally think of other things. The taxis are out today. There are various skeleton papers being sold. One believes nothing. Clive dines in Mayfair, & everyone is pro-men; I go to Harrison [dentist], 6k he shouts me down with "Its red rag versus Union Jack, Mrs Woolf" & how Thomas has 100000.4 Frankie dines out, & finds everyone pro-Government. Bob [Trevelyan] drops in 6k says Churchill is for peace, but Baldwin wont budge.5 Clive says Churchill is for tear gas bombs, fight to the death, & is at the bottom of it all. So we go on, turning in our cage. I notice how frequently we break of[f] with "Well I don't know." According to L. this open state of mind is due to the lack of papers. It feels like a deadlock, on both sides; as if we could keep fixed like this for weeks. What one prays for is God: the King or God; some impartial person to say kiss & be friends—as apparently we all desire.
Just back from a walk to the Strand. Of course one notices lorries full of elderly men & girls standing like passengers in the old 3rd class carriages. Children swarm. They pick up bits of old wood paving. Everything seems to be going fast, away, in business[?]. The shops are open but empty. Over it all is some odd pale unnatural atmosphere— great activity but no normal life. I think we shall become more independent & stoical as the days go on. And I am involved in dress buying with Todd [editor of Vogue]; I tremble 6k shiver all over at the appalling magnitude of the task I have undertaken—to\ go to a dressmaker recommended by Todd, even, she suggested, but here my blood ran cold, with Todd. Perhaps this excites me more feverishly than the Strike. It is a little like the early hours of the morning (this state of things) when one has been up all night. Business improved today. We sold a few books. Bob cycled from Leith Hill, getting up at 5 a.m. to avoid the crowd. He punctured an hour later, met his tailor who mended him, set forth again, was almost crushed in the crowd near London, 6k has since been tramping London, from Chelsea to Bloomsbury to gather gossip, 6k talk, incoherently about Desmond's essays 6k his own poetry. He has secreted two more of these works which 'ought to be published'. He is ravenous greedy, 6k apelike, but has a kind of russet surly charm; like a dog one teases. He complained how Logan teased him. Clive calls in to discuss bulletins—indeed, more than anything it is like a house

where someone is dangerously ill; 6k friends drop in to enquire, 6k one has to wait for doctor's news—Quennel, the poet, came; a lean boy, nervous, plaintive, rather pretty; on the look out for work, 6k come to tap the Wolves—who are said, I suppose to be an authority on that subject. We suggested Desmond's job.6 After an hour of this, he left,
------here Clive came in 6k interrupted. He has been shopping in the
West End with Mary. Nothing to report there. He 6k L. listened in at 7 6k heard nothing. The look of the streets—how people "trek to work" that is the stock phrase: that it will be cold 6k windy tomorrow (it is shivering cold today) that there was a warm debate in the Commons—
Among the crowd of trampers in Kingsway were old Pritchard, toothless, old wispy, benevolent; who tapped L. on the shoulder 6k said he was "training to shoot him"; 6k old Miss Pritchard, equally frail, dusty, rosy, shabby. "How long will it last Mrs Woolf?" "Four weeks" "Ah dear!" Off they tramp, over the bridge to Kennington I think; next in Kingsway comes the old battered clerk, who has 5 miles to walk. Miss Talbot has an hours walk; Mrs Brown 2 hours walk.7 But they all arrive, 6k clatter about as usual—Pritchard doing poor peoples work for nothing, as I imagine his way is, 6k calling himself a Tory.
Then we are fighting the Square on the question of leading dogs. Dogs must be led; but tennis can be played they say. L. is advancing to the fight, 6k has enlisted the Pekinese in the Square. We get no news from abroad; neither can send it. No parcels. Pence have been added to milk, vegetables 6kc. And Karin has bought 4 joints.
It is now a chilly lightish evening; very quiet; the only sound a distant barrel organ playing. The bricks stand piled on the building 6k there remain. And Viola was about to make our fortune. She dined here, Monday night, the night of the strike.8

Friday y May
No change. "London calling the British Isles. Good morning everyone". That is how it begins at 10. The only news that the archbishops are conferring, & ask our prayers that they may be guided right. Whether this means action, we know not. We know nothing. Mrs Cartwright walked from Hampstead. She & L. got heated arguing, she being anti-labour; because she does not see why they should be supported, 6k observes men in the street loafing instead of working. Very little work done by either of us today. A cold, wet day, with sunny moments. All arrangements unchanged. Girl came to make chair covers, having walked from Shoreditch, but enjoyed it. Times sent for 25 Violas.9 Question whether to bring out a skeleton Roneo Nation. Leonard went to the office, I to the Brit[ish] Mus[eum]; where all was chill serenity, dignity 6k severity. Written up are the names of great men; & we all cower like mice nibbling crumbs in our most official discreet impersonal mood beneath. I like this dusty bookish atmosphere. Most of the readers seemed to have rubbed their noses off & written their eyes out. Yet they have a life they like—believe in the necessity of making books, I suppose: verify, collate, make up other books, for ever. It must be 15 years since I read here. I came home & found L. & Hubert [Henderson] arriving from the office—Hubert did what is now called "taking a cup of tea", which means an hour & a halfs talk about the Strike. Here is his prediction: if it is not settled, or in process, on Monday, it will last 5 weeks. Today no wages are paid. Leonard said he minded this more than the war & Hubert told us how he had travelled in Germany, 6k what brutes they were in 1912.10 He thinks gas 6k electricity will go next; had been at a journalists meeting where all were against labour (against the general strike that is) 6k assumed Government victory. L. says if the state wins 6k smashes T[rades]. U[nion]s he will devote his life to labour: if the archbishop succeeds, he will be baptised. Now to dine at the Commercio to meet Clive.
Sunday g May
There is no news of the strike. The broadcaster has just said that we are praying today. And L. 6k I quarrelled last night. I dislike the tub

thumper in him; he the irrational Xtian in me. I will write it all out later— my feelings about the Strike; but I am now writing to test my theory that there is consolation in expression. Unthinkingly, I refused just now to lunch with the Phil Bakers, who fetched L. in their car. Suddenly, io minutes ago, I began to regret this profoundly. How I should love the talk, 6k seeing the house, 6k battling my wits against theirs. Now the sensible thing to do is to provide some pleasure to balance this, which I ed. not have had, if I had gone. I can only think of writing this, 6k going round the Square. Obscurely, I have my clothes complex to deal with. When I am asked out my first thought is, but I have no clothes to go in. Todd has never sent me the address of the shop; 6k I may have annoyed her by refusing to lunch with her. But the Virginia who refuses is a very instinctive 6k therefore powerful person. The reflective 6k sociable only comes to the surface later. Then the conflict.
Baldwin broadcast last night: he rolls his rs; tries to put more than mortal strength into his words. "Have faith in me. You elected me 18 months ago. What have I done to forfeit your confidence? Can you not trust me to see justice done between man 6k man?" Impressive as it is to hear the very voice of the Prime Minister, descendant of Pitt 6k Chatham, still I can't heat up my reverence to the right pitch. I picture the stalwart oppressed man, bearing the world on his shoulders. And suddenly his self assertiveness becomes a little ridiculous. He becomes megalomaniac. No I dont trust him: I don't trust any human being, however loud they bellow 6k roll their rs.
Monday 10 May
Quarrel with L. settled in studio. Oh, but how incessant the arguments 6k interruptions are! As I write, L. is telephoning to Hubert. We are getting up a petition.11 There was a distinct thaw (we thought) last night. The Arch B. 6k Grey both conciliatory.12 So we went to bed happy. Today ostensibly the same dead lock; beneath the surface all sorts of

currents, of which we get the most contradictory reports. Dear old Frankie has a story (over the fire in the bookshop) of an interview between Asquith & Reading which turned Reading hostile to the men. Later, through Clive, through Desmond, Asquith is proved to be at the Wharfe, 60 miles from Lord Reading.13 Lady Wimbore gave a party— brought Thomas 6k Baldwin together.14 Meeting mysteriously called off today. Otherwise strike wd. have been settled. I to H of Commons this morning with L.'s article to serve as stuffing for Hugh Dalton in the Commons this afternoon.15 All this humbug of police & marble statues vaguely displeasing. But the Gvt. provided me with buses both ways, & no stones thrown. Silver & crimson guard at Whitehall; the cenotaph, & men bare heading themselves. Home to find Tom Marshall caballing with L.; after lunch to [Birrell & Garnett's] bookshop, where the gossip (too secret for the telephone) was imparted; to London Library where Gooch—a tall, pale mule, affable & long winded, was seen, & Molly dustily diligently reading the Dublin Review for 1840,16 walk home; Clive, to refute gossip; James to get St Loe to sign;17 then Maynard ringing up to command us to print the Nation as the N. Statesman is printed; to wh. I agreed, & L. disagreed; then dinner; a motor car collision—more telephones ringing at the moment 9)5.

Tuesday 11 May
I may as well continue to write—this book is used to scandalous mistreatment—while I wait—here interruptions began       f which lasted till the present moment/ when I write with Gerald Brenan in the study composing with infinite difficulty a letter to Mr Galsworthy.18 Arguing about the Ar[chbisho]p of Canterbury with Jack Squire at 12 seems now normal, but not—how often do I repeat—nearly as exciting as writing To the Lighthouse or about de Q[uincey].19 I believe it is false psychology to think that in after years these details willl be interesting. The war is now barren sand after all. But one never knows: & waiting about, writing serves to liberate the mind from the fret & itch of these innumerable details. Squire doesn't want to "knuckle under". To kneel is the duty of the Church. The Church has no connection with the nation. Events are that the Roneo workers refuse to set up L.'s article in the Nation, in which he says that the Strike is not illegal or unconstitutional. Presumably this is a little clutch of the Government throttle. Mr Baldwin has been visiting the Zoo.20 In the middle of lunch admirable Miss Bulley arrives, having visited Conway unsuccessfully.21 St Loe has joined. So Rose Macaulay & Lytton. Tonight the names are to be handed in; & then perhaps silence will descend upon us. Ralph & Gerald are our emissaries. But

then everyone rings up—the most unlikely people—[Donald] Brace for instance, Kahan;22 the woman comes with the new sofa cover. Yesterday Ralph & Frances Marshall were in a railway accident. She had her teeth jangled. One man was killed; another had his leg broken—the result of driving a train without signals, by the efforts of ardent optimistic undergraduates.23 Billing has been in to say he will print anything, all his men being back & needing work. So, as poor MacDermott has been dead since January, perhaps the Nation will be done by them.24 Come to think of it, almost all our type is standing, so our printing was in any case hardly feasible. Must I now ring up James? Day's Library boy was set upon by roughs, had his cycle overturned, but kept his books & was unhurt after calling here for 6 Tree. Tree dribbles along. There is an occasional order. Mrs C[artwright]. arrives on Faith's bicycle which is red with rust.25
Wednesday 12 May
Strike settled, (ring at bell)
The Strike was settled about 1.15—or it was then broadcast. I was in Tottenham Court Rd. at 1 & heard Bartholomew & Fletcher's megaphone declaim that the T.U.C. leaders were at Downing Street;26 came home to find that neither L. or Nelly had heard this: 5 minutes later, the wireless. They told us to stand by & await important news. Then a piano played a tune. Then the solemn broadcaster assuming incredible pomp 6k gloom

& speaking one word to the minute read out: Message from io Downing Street. The T.U.C. leaders have agreed that Strike shall be withdrawn. Instantly L. dashed off to telephone to the office, Nelly to tell Pritchard's clerk, & I to Mrs C. (But N[elly]. was beforehand) then we finished lunch; then I rang up Clive—who proposes that we should have a drink tonight. I saw this morning 5 or 6 armoured cars slowly going along Oxford Street; on each two soldiers sat in tin helmets, & one stood with his hand at the gun which was pointed straight ahead ready to fire. But I also noticed on one a policeman smoking a cigarette. Such sights I dare say I shall never see again; & dont in the least wish to. Already (it is now io past 2) men have appeared at the hotel with drainpipes. Also Grizzle has won her case against the Square.
Thursday 13 May
I suppose all pages devoted to the Strike will be skipped, when I read over this book. Oh that dull old chapter, I shall say. Excitements about what are called real things are always unutterably transitory. Yet it is gloomy—& L. is gloomy, & so am I unintelligibly—today because the Strike continues—no railwaymen back: vindictiveness has now seized our masters. Government shillyshallies. Apparently, the T.U.C. agreed to terms wh. the miners now reject. Anyhow it will take a week to get the machinery of England to run again. Trains are dotted about all over England. Labour, it seems clear, will be effectively diddled again, & perhaps rid of its power to make strikes in future. Printers still out at the Nation. In short, the strain removed, we all fall out & bicker & backbite.27 Such is human nature—6k really I dont like human nature unless all candied over with art. We dined with a strike party last night ek went back to Clive's. A good deal was said about art there. Good dull Janet Vaughan, reminding me of Emma, joined us.28 I went to my

dressmaker, Miss Brooke, & found it the most quiet & friendly & even enjoyable of proceedings. I have a great lust for lovely stuffs, & shapes; wh. I have not gratified since Sally Young died.29 A bold move this, but now I'm free of the fret of clothes, which is worth paying for, & need not parade Oxford Street.
Thursday zo May
Waiting for L. to come back from chess with Roger: 11.25. I think nothing need be said of the Strike. As tends to happen, one's mind slips after the crisis, & what the settlement is, or will be, I know not.
We must now fan the books up again. Viola & Phil Baker were both struck on the wing. Viola comes, very tactfully, as a friend, she says, to consult after dinner. She is a flamboyant creature—much of an actress— much abused by the Waleys & Marjories; but rather taking to me. She has the great egotism, the magnification of self, which any bodily display, I think, produces. She values women by their hips & ankles, like horses. Easily reverts to the topic of her own charms: how she shd. have married
the D. of Rutland. "Lord------(his uncle) told me I was the woman
John really loved. The duchess said to me 'Do make love to John &
get him away from ------. At any rate you're tall & beautiful—' And I
sometimes think if I'd married him—but he never asked me—Daddy wouldn't have died. I'd have prevented that operation: Then how he'd have loved a duke for a son in law! All his life was dressing up—that sort of thing you know."30 So she runs on, in the best of clothes, easy & familiar, but reserved too; with the wiles & warinesses of a woman of the world, half sordid half splendid, not quite at her ease with us, yet glad of a room where she can tell her stories, of listeners to whom she is new & strange. She will run on by the hour—yet is very watchful not to bore; a good business woman, & floating over considerable acuteness on her charm. All this however, is not making her book move, as they say.
Eddy came in to tea. I like him—his flattery? his nobility? I dont know—I find him easy & eager. And Vita comes to lunch tomorrow, which will be a great amusement & pleasure. I am amused at my relations

with her: left so ardent in January—& now what? Also I like her presence & her beauty. Am I in love with her? But what is love? Her being 'in love' (it must be comma'd thus) with me, excites & flatters; & interests. What is this 'love'? Oh & then she gratifies my eternal curiosity: who's she seen, whats she done—for I have no enormous opinion of her poetry. How could I—I who have such delight in mitigating the works even of my greatest friends. I should have been reading her poem tonight:31 instead finished Sharon Turner—a prosy, simple, old man; the very spit & image of Saxon, a boundless bore, I daresay, with the most intense zeal for "improving myself", & the holiest affections, & 13 children, & no character or impetus—a love of long walks, of music; modest, yet conceited in an ant like way. I mean he has the industry 6k persistency in recounting compliments of an ant, but so little character that one hardly calls him vain!
Tuesday 25 May
The heat has come, bringing with it the inexplicably disagreeable memories of parties, & George Duckworth; a fear haunts me even now, as I drive past Park Lane on top ofa bus, & think of Lady Arthur Russell & so on.32 I become out of love with everything; but fall into love as the bus reaches Holborn. A curious transition that, from tyranny to freedom. Mixed with it is the usual "I thought that when you died last May, Charles, there had died along with you"—death being hidden among the leaves: & Nessa's birthday among the little hard pink rosettes of the may, which we used to stop & smell on the pavement at the top of Hyde Pk. Gate & I asked why, if it was may, it did not come out on the ist; it comes out now, & Nessa's birthday, which must be her 47th, is in a few days. She is in Italy: Duncan is said to have "committed a nuisance" for which he has been fined 10 lira.

L. has been having Nelly's poisonous cold, brought by Lottie—Do I hear him? Grizzle says Yes: stands tail wagging—She is right. Vita has it; or I should be dining—
Now we have been sitting in the Square. L. is better. I am happier. Tomorrow we go to Rodmell—to find the bath & the W.C. & the drawing room with the wall pulled down. This cherry has been dangled
6  withdrawn so often that I scarcely believe we shall now munch it. And I must notice that the Strike still makes it necessary for me to find
out trains at Victoria.
I have finished—sketchily I admit—the 2nd part of To the Lighthouse —& may, then, have it all written over by the end of July. A record—
7 months, if it so turns out.
So Vita came: & I register the shock of meeting after absence; how shy one is; how disillusioned by the actual body; how sensitive to new shades of tone—something 'womanly' I detected, more mature; & she was shabbier, come straight off in her travelling clothes; & not so beautiful, as sometimes perhaps; & so we sat talking on the sofa by the window, she rather silent, I chattering, partly to divert her attention from me; & to prevent her thinking "Well, is this all?" as she was bound to think, having declared herself so openly in writing. So that we each registered some disillusionment; & perhaps also acquired some grains of additional solidity— This may well be more lasting than the first rhapsody. But I compared her state, justly, to a flock of birds flying hither thither, escaped, confused: returning, after a long journey, to the middle of things again. She was quieter, shyer, awkwarder than usual even. She has no ready talk—confronted by Nelly or Mrs Cartwright she stands like a schoolgirl. I think it quite likely she will get Harold out of his job. But then, as I always feel, with her 'grand life', Dotties & so on, whom I don't know at all, there may be many parts of her perfectly unillumined.33 But I cannot write. For the most part I can write. Suddenly the word instinct leaves me. This is the permanent state of most people no doubt. Maynard met George & Lady M[argaret]. at the Darwins. He is a humbug & she a fiend, he writes. She now walks with a stick.34 What a dreary world it is—these bubbles meeting once in 20 years or so.

Wednesday 9 June
Then I got the flue, last Saturday; sat shivering at Lords, in the hot sunshine; so have seen no one, except basement dwellers, & put off Don Giovanni, Dadie & Hope tonight, & Osbert [Sitwell's dinner tomorrow.1 All my bubbling up faculty at once leaves me. I grind out a little of that eternal How to read, lecture, as the Yale Review has bought it,2 & cannot conceive what The Lighthouse is all about. I hope to whip my brains up either at Vita's or Rodmell this weekend.
Yes, Rodmell is a perfect triumph, I consider—but L. advises me not to say so. In particular, our large combined drawing eating room, with its 5 windows, its beams down the middle, & flowers & leaves nodding in all round us. The bath boils quickly; the water closets gush & surge (not quite sufficiently though). The weather again failed us, & we had a queer journey home, via Newhaven, Peacehaven & Brighton. Trains slow 6k scarce. The Strike, I should say, continues. We then went to a party at Edith Sitwell's (I in my new dress) 'to meet Miss Stein', a lady much like Joan Fry, but more massive; in blue-sprinkled brocade, rather formidable.3 There was Morgan, Siegfried [Sassoon], Todd—to whom I proposed, wildly, fantastically, a book—which she accepts!4—(& Viola so much criticised in the austere heights of Ham Spray) & Edith distraught; & cherries in handfulls, & barley water—as L. described it very brilliantly to Sybil the next day. She came: no one else; we sat & laughed—& wheres the harm in this stupidish, kindly, rather amusing woman, I asked? Then she expressed a wish to dine with us. L. is lunching with Wells today.

Wednesday .9 June
Leonard back from Wells who chattered till \ to 4: likes to walk through the streets; has a house in France kept for him by a very intelligent Brazilian lady.5 Called me "too intelligent—a bad thing": can't criticise; brings in social theories, because he says in an age when society is dissolving, the social state is part of the character. They lunched at Boulesteins. Leonard asked for him at the Automobile Club; "A very famous name" said the man.6 And the warmth & clamour of Wells' fame seems to reach me, this chilly rainy evening; & I see how, if I stayed there, as he asks us, he would overwhelm me. (We are very hungry, by the way; Nelly is preparing a nice roast chicken & ices for dinner, which I shall enjoy. Then we shall play the Gramophone). I'm cheering up after my attack I'm glad to say, though a little undecided whether to stay with Vita or go to Monks House.
L. is going to make a book ofhis essays. I think of asking Lady Horner to write her memoirs.7 Today we discussed the date of Nelly's holiday— & so we go on.
Following VW's influenza or 'nerve exhaustion headache' (III VW Letters, no. 1646), the Woolfs went to Rodmell on Saturday 11 June,- LW returned to London on Sunday afternoon leaving Vita Sackville-West, who had come to lunch, to stay with VW until Tuesday. The next two weeks were very sociable, and included a dinner party at the Hutchinsons to meet Aldous Huxley who had just been round the world, and a visit to Garsington, when she met Robert Bridges, on 26-27 June.
Wednesday 30 June
This is the last day of June & finds me in black despair because Clive laughed at my new hat, Vita pitied me, & I sank to the depths of gloom.

This happened at Clive's last night after going to the Sitwells with Vita. Oh dear I was wearing the hat without thinking whether it was good or bad; & it was all very flashing & easy; & there I saw a man with braided hair, another with long red tongues in his button hole; & sat by Vita & laughed & clubbed. When we got out it was only 10.30—a soft starry night: I had refused to go to Colefax: it was still too early for her to go. So she said "Shall we go to Clive's & pick him up?" & I was then again so lighthearted, driving through the park, & seeing people scud before us. Also we saw all the Mayfair houses, & finally came to Gordon Sqre & there was Nessa tripping along in the dark, in her quiet black hat. So we had some lively talk. She said Duncan was having a sandwich at the public house: then he came, carrying an egg. Come on all of us to Clive's, I said; & they agreed. Well, it was after they had come & we were all sitting round talking that Clive suddenly said, or bawled rather, what an astonishing hat you're wearing! Then he asked where I got it. I pretended a mystery, tried to change the talk, was not allowed, & they pulled me down between them, like a hare; I never felt more humiliated. Clive said did Mary choose it? No. Todd said Vita. And the dress? Todd of course: after that I was forced to go on as if nothing terrible had happened; but it was very forced 6k queer & humiliating. So I talked & laughed too much. Duncan prim & acid as ever told me it was utterly impossible to do anything with a hat like that. And I joked about the Squires' party. & Leonard got silent, & I came away deeply chagrined, as unhappy as I have been these ten years; & revolved it in sleep & dreams all night; & today has been ruined.
Thursday 1 July
These reflections about the hat read rather amusingly I think. What a weathercock of sensibility I am! How I enjoy—or at least how (for I was acutely unhappy & humiliated) these gyrations interest me, conscious as I am of a strong lynch pin controlling them—Leonard in short. Coming out from lunching with Maynard today I ran (in the hat, in the dress) into Clive & Mary, & had to stand their fire: dress praised to the skies, hat passed. So thats over. Indeed the cloud began to lift at 7 last night.
But all this has obscured Garsington; Bridges; & Wells. These great men are so much like the rest of us. Wells remarkable only for a combination of stockishness with acuity: he has a sharp nose, & the cheeks & jowl of a butcher. He likes, I judge, rambling & romancing about the lives of other people; he romanced about the Webbs: said their books were splendid eggs, well & truly laid, but addled. Described Beatrice, as

by a gipsy & a Jew: a flashing creature, become Quaker as we all do as we get on. That has nothing to do with (God) Christianity. Are you a Quaker, I asked. Of course I am. One believes that there is a reason for things (I think he said). But he did not rise steadily off the ground for long. Lunch is a hot stodgy hour too. I could see from the plaintive watery look on Mrs Wells' face (she has widely spaced teeth & in repose looks very worried, at the same time vacant) that he is arrogant lustful & bullying in private life.1 The virtues he likes are courage & vitality. I said how ghastly! (That is the story of Dorothy Richardson's struggles.) No: nothing is ghastly where there is courage he said. He rambled over her life, amusingly. How she married Odel, a man who makes symbolical drawings—bubbles coming out of a human mouth & turning into womens legs & so on: which is so like life, Wells said: the heterogeneity— one thing leading to another, & the design so remarkable. But they dont sell. And now Duckworth won't publish any more of her books.2
As for Bridges: he sprang from a rhododendron bush, a very lean tall old man, with a curly grey hat, & a reddish ravaged face, smoky fierce eyes, with a hazy look in them; very active; rather hoarse, talking incessantly. We sat in his open room & looked past blue spikes of flowers to hills, which were invisible, but when they show, all this goes out he said—his one poetical saying, or saying that struck me as such. We talked about handwriting, & criticism; how Garrod had written on Keats; & they know a Petrarchan sonnet, but not why one alters it. Because they dont write sonnets, I suggested, & urged him to write criticism.8 He is direct & spry, very quick in all his movements, racing

me down the garden to look at pinks, then into his library, where he showed me the French critics, then said Michelet was his favourite historian; then I asked to see the Hopkins manuscripts; & sat looking at them with that gigantic grasshopper Aldous folded up in a chair close by. Ottoline undulated 6k vagulated.4
He asked me to come again: would read me his poems—not his early ones which want a beautiful voice, 6k aren't interesting he said: but his later ones, his hexameters. He skipped off 6k held the gate open. I said how much I liked his poems—true of the short ones: but was mainly pleased 6k gratified to find him so obliging 6k easy 6k interested. Ottoline flattered me on this point. But she had her points too; her dwindling charm reveals them, as we sat by the lake, discussing Mary Clive life, truth, literature. Then dressed, 6k Aldous 6k Eddie 6k Philip Nichols, 6k Miss Spender Clay, who can have £500 a year if she wants it Julian said.5
Sunday 4 July
Then Wells came again; 6k stayed till 4, when he had to meet an American.6 He is getting to the drowsy stage: the 60s. Seems well wishing but not so spry as he used to be. He talked about his new book, the thoughts one has at 60. He brings in everything—a man called Lubin, for instance, who invented intn agriculture (I think) a man who died in poverty 6k was shuffled out of the way to his grave in Rome the day that Wilson made his entry—"that shallow, pretentious empty headed

professor"— Lubin was the real thinker for peace.7 What other ideas had he? Desmond asked. Well, to do away with Sunday. There should be [a] holiday once in 10 days. That was his own stint, 10 days work, then 4 or 5 days off. The present system is wasteful. The shadow of the week end begins on Friday, is not over till Monday afternoon. He said sometimes he wrote all day for days; sometimes not at all. He struck me again as an odd mixture of bubble & solidity—likes to blow a phrase now & then. We got him on to Hardy—a very simple, subtle old peasant man much impressed by clever people who writef;] very humble, delighted when Wells took Rebecca West to call on him, walked half way into Dorchester with them—"an impudent young journalist" Wells called her. Hardy had heard of her. Came to stay with Barrie to see an air raid— wrote his early books in chapters as the printers wanted them.8 Then he got up to go: we asked him to stay & tell us about Henry James. So he sat down. Oh I should be delighted to stay & talk the whole afternoon, he said. Henry James was a formalist. He always thought of clothes. He was never intimate with anyone—not with his brother even: had never been in love. Once his brother wanted to see Chesterton, & climbed a ladder & looked over a wall. This angered Henry; who called in Wells & asked him for an opinion—as if I had one!9 Wells has learnt nothing from Proust—his book like the British Museum. One knows there are delightful interesting things in it, but one does not go there. One day it may be wet—I shall say God, what am I to do this afternoon? & I shall read Proust as I might go to the British Museum. Would not read Richardson—a man who knows all about feminine psychology (with some contempt) nobody ought to know that. I said on the contrary he

knew very little: was conventional. Honour, chastity & so on. Wells said we had changed our ideas completely. That idea of chastity had vanished. Women were even more suggestible than men. Now they dont think about it—a chaste little couple (he talks of little couples) mixing with a promiscuous little couple. He said we are happier perhaps— children are certainly more at ease with their parents. But he thought they were beginning to miss restraints. They were wondering what things were for. They were very restless; discussing Henry James & Eliot, & how formal they are & overdone with manner—(he described H.J. pushing under a letter he was writing to talk to Wells "at the Reform"). I said it was American. They were alien to our civilisation. He said he had been that himself. His father was a gardener, his mother a ladies maid. He found it very strange to meet people who went to parties & wore dress clothes. Henry James could not describe love— there comes the ahh—laying on of hands. This Wells could do himself. I am a journalist. I pride myself upon being a journalist he said. Well I have a sort of feeling that all writing should be journalism—(done with an object)— One knows nothing of what posterity will want—may be a guide book. I tell Arnold [Bennett] they will read him for his topography. In all this he showed himself, as Desmond said afterwards, perfectly content to be himself, aware ofhis powers,—aware that he need not take any trouble, since his powers were big enough.
Thursday 22 July
The summer hourglass is running out rapidly & rather sandily. Many nights I wake in a shudder thinking of some atrocity of mine. I bring home minute pinpricks which magnify in the middle of the night into gaping wounds. However, I drive my pen through de Quincey of a morning, having put The Lighthouse aside till Rodmell. There all virtue, all good, is in retreat. Here nothing but odds & ends—going to the dentist, buying combs; having Maynard & Bob to tea, & then Ralph & Frances to dinner, followed by Eddie & Kitchen [C. H. B. Kitchin]. But we are both jaded, & get no clear impression any more from the human face—must dine with Osbert Sitwell tonight though, & go to Hardy tomorrow. This is human life: this is the infinitely precious stuff issued in a narrow roll to us now, & then withdrawn for ever; & we spend it thus. Days without definite sensation are the worst of all. Days when one compells oneself to undergo this or that for some reason—but what reason?
There is nothing important at the moment to record: or if so, & one's

state of mind is overwhelmingly important, I leave that, too for Rodmell. There I shall come to grips with the last part of that python, my book; it is a tug & a struggle, & I wonder now & then, why I let myself in for it. Rose Macaulay said "What else would one do with one's thoughts?" I have not seen her again nor Gwen, nor written to Violet [Dickinson]; nor learnt French, nor finished Clarissa.
Desmond came in; talked about Shakespeare. Now to settle my mind to Suspiria.10
Sunday 25 July
At first I thought it was Hardy, & it was the parlourmaid, a small thin girl, wearing a proper cap. She came in with silver cake stands & so on. Mrs Hardy talked to us about her dog.11 How long ought we to stay? Can Mr Hardy walk much &c I asked, making conversation, as I knew one would have to. She has the large sad lack lustre eyes of a childless woman; great docility & readiness; as if she had learnt her part; not great alacrity, but resignation, in welcoming more visitors; wears a sprigged voile dress, black shoes, & a necklace. We cant go far now, she said, though we do walk every day, because our dog isn't able to walk far. He bites, she told us. She became more natural & animated about the dog, who is evidently the real centre of her thoughts—then the maid came in. Then again the door opened, more sprucely, & in trotted a little puffy cheeked cheerful old man, with an atmosphere cheerful & businesslike in addressing us, rather like an old doctors or solicitors, saying "Well now—" or words like that as he shook hands. He was dressed in rough grey with a striped tie. His nose has a joint in it, & the end curves down. A round whitish face, the eyes now faded & rather watery, but the whole aspect cheerful & vigorous. He sat on a three cornered chair (I am too jaded with all this coming & going to do more than gather facts) at a round table, where there were the cake stands & so on; a chocolate roll; what is called a good tea; but he only drank one cup, sitting on his

three cornered chair. He was extremely affable & aware of his duties. He did not let the talk stop or disdain making talk. He talked of father— said he had seen me, or it might have been my sister but he thought it was me, in my cradle. He had been to Hyde Park Place—oh Gate was it. A very quiet street. That was why my father liked it. Odd to think that in all these years he had never been down there again. He went there often. Your father took my novel—Far From the Madding Crowd. We stood shoulder to shoulder against the British public about certain matters dealt with in that novel—You may have heard. Then he said how some other novel had fallen through that was to appear—the parcel had been lost coming from France—not a very likely thing to happen, as your father said—a big parcel of manuscript; & he asked me to send my story. I think he broke all the Cornhill laws—not to see the whole book; so I sent it in chapter by chapter, & was never late.12 Wonderful what youth is! I had it in my head doubtless, but I never thought twice about it— It came out every month. They were nervous, because of Miss Thackeray I think. She said she became paralysed & could not write a word directly she heard the press begin. I daresay it was bad for a novel to appear like that. One begins to think what is good for the magazine, not what is good for the novel.
You think what makes a strong curtain, put in Mrs Hardy jocularly. She was leaning upon the tea table, not eating gazing out.
Then we talked about manuscripts. Mrs Smith had found the MS of F. from the M.C. in a drawer during the war, & sold it for the Red Cross.13 Now he has his MSS back, & the printer rubs out all the marks. But he wishes they would leave them, as they prove it genuine.
He puts his head down like some old pouter pigeon. He has a very long head; & quizzical bright eyes, for in talk they grow bright. He said when he was in the Strand 6 years ago he scarcely knew where he was, & he used to know it all intimately. He told us that he used to buy 2nd hand books—nothing valuable—in Wyck Street. Then he wondered why Great James Street should be so narrow & Bedford Row so broad.

He had often wondered about that. At this rate, London would soon be unrecognisable. But I shall never go there again. Mrs Hardy tried to persuade him that it was an easy drive—only 6 hours or so. I asked if she liked it, & she said Granville Barker had told her that when she was in the nursing home she had 'the time of her life'.14 She knew everyone in Dorchester, but she thought there were more interesting people in London. Had I often been to Siegfried's flat? I said no. Then she asked about him & Morgan, said he was elusive, as if they enjoyed visits from him. I said I heard from Wells that Mr Hardy had been up to London to see an air raid. "What things they say!" he said. It was my wife. There was an air raid one night when we stayed with Barrie. We just heard a little pop in the distance— The searchlights were beautiful. I thought if a bomb now were to fall on this flat how many writers would be lost. And he smiled in his queer way, which is fresh & yet sarcastic a little: anyhow shrewd. Indeed, there was no trace to my thinking of the simple peasant. He seemed perfectly aware of everything; in no doubt or hesitation; having made up his mind; & being delivered of all his work; so that he was in no doubt about that either. He was not interested much in his novels, or in anybodies novels; took it all easily & naturally. "I never took long with them" he said. The longest was the Z>zranasts. (so pronounced). "But that was really 3 books" said Mrs Hardy. Yes: & that took me 6 years; but not working all the time. Can you write poetry regularly? I asked (being beset with the desire to hear him say something about his books); but the dog kept cropping up. How he bit; how the inspector came out; how he was ill; & they could do nothing for him. Would you mind if I let him in? asked Mrs Hardy, & in came We[s]sex, a very tousled, rough brown & white mongrel, got to guard the house, so naturally he bites people, said Mrs H.; Well, I dont know about that, said Hardy, perfectly natural, & not setting much stock by his poems either it seemed. Did you write poems at the same time as your novels? I asked. No. he said. I wrote a great many poems. I used to send them about, but they were always returned, he chuckled. And in those days I believed in editors. Many were lost—all the fair copies were lost. But I found the notes, & I wrote them from those. I was always finding them. I found one the other day; but I don't think I shall find any more.
Siegfried took rooms near here, & said he was going to work very hard, but he left soon.

E. M. Forster takes a long time to produce anything—7 years, he chuckled. All this made a great impression of the ease with which he did things. "I daresay F. from the M. C. would have been a great deal better if I had written it differently", he said. But as if it could not be helped, & did not matter.
He used to go to the Lushingtons in Kensington Sqre & saw my mother there. She used to come in & out when I was talking to your father.15
I wanted him to say one word about his writing before we left & ed only ask wh. of his books he wd. have chosen, if like me, he had had to choose one to read in the train. I had taken the M[ayor] of Casterbridge]. That's being dramatised, put in Mrs H. 6k then brought L[ove's]. Little. Ironies.16
And did it hold your interest? he asked.
I stammered that I could not stop reading it, which was true, but sounded wrong. Anyhow, he was not going to be drawn, & went off about giving a young lady a wedding present. None of my books are fitted to be wedding presents, he said. You must give Mrs Woolf one of your books, said Mrs Hardy, inevitably. Yes I will. But I'm afraid only in the little thin paper edition, he said. I protested that it would be enough if he wrote his name (then was vaguely uncomfortable).
Then there was de la Mare. His last book of stories seemed to them such a pity.17 Hardy had liked some of his poems very much. People said he must be a sinister man to write such stories. But he is [a] very nice man—a very nice man indeed.
He said to a friend who begged him not to give up poetry, "I'm afraid poetry is giving up me." The truth is he is a very kind man, & sees anyone who wants to see him. He has 16 people for the day sometimes. Do you think one can't write poetry if one sees people? I asked. "One might be able to—I dont see why not. Its a question of physical strength" said Hardy. But clearly he preferred solitude himself. Always however he said something sensible & sincere; & thus made the obvious business

of compliment giving rather unpleasant. He seemed to be free of it all; very active minded; liking to describe people; not to talk in an abstract way: for example Col. Lawrence, bicycling with a broken arm "held like that" from Lincoln to Hardy listened at the door; to hear if there was anyone there.18
I hope he won't commit suicide, said Mrs Hardy pensively, still leaning over the tea cups, gazing despondently. He often says things like it, though he has never said quite that perhaps. But he has blue lines round his eyes. He calls himself Shaw in the army. No one is to know where he is. But it got into the papers.
He promised me (to give up fly—) not to go into the air, said Hardy.
My husband doesn't like anything to do with the air, said Mrs Hardy.
Now we began to look at the grandfather clock in the corner. We
said we must go—tried to confess we were only down for the day. I
forgot to say that he offered L. whisky & water, wh. struck me that he
was competent as a host, & in every way.
So we got up & signed Mrs H's visitors books; & Hardy took my L. Little Ironies off, & trotted back with it signed, & Woolf spelt Wolff, wh. I daresay had given him some anxiety.19 Then We[s]sex came in again. I asked if Hardy could stroke him. So he bent down & stroked him, like the master of the house. We[s]sex went on wheezing away.
There was not a trace anywhere of deference to editors, or respect for rank, an extreme simplicity: What impressed me was his freedom, ease, & vitality. He seemed very "Great Victorian" doing the whole thing with a sweep of his hand (they are ordinary smallish, curled up hands) & setting no great stock by literature; but immensely interested in facts; incidents; & somehow, one could imagine, naturally swept off into imagining & creating without a thought of its being difficult or remarkable; becoming obsessed; & living in imagination. Mrs Hardy thrust his old grey hat into his hand & he trotted us out on to the road. Where is that? I asked him, pointing to a clump of trees on the down opposite, for his house is outside the town, with open country (rolling, massive downs, crowned with little tree coronets before & behind) & he said, with interest, "That is Weymouth. We see the lights at night—not the

lights themselves, but the reflection of them." And so we left, & he trotted in again.
Also I asked him if I might see the picture of Tess which Morgan had described, an old picture: whereupon he led me to an awful engraving of Tess coming into a room from a picture by Herkomer.20 "That was rather my idea of her" he said. But I said I had been told he had an old picture. "Thats fiction" he said. "I used to see people now & then with a look of her."
Also Mrs Hardy said to me, do you know Aldous Huxley? I said I did. They had been reading his book, which she thought 'very clever'. But Hardy could not remember it. Said his wife had to read to him— his eyes were now so bad. ("Was that the book where the) "Theyve changed everything now he said. We used to think there was a beginning & a middle & an end. We believed in the Aristotelian theory. Now one of those stories came to an end with a woman going out ofthe room."21 He chuckled. But he no longer reads novels.
The whole thing—literature, novels &c—all seemed to him an amusement, far away, too, scarcely to be taken seriously. Yet he had sympathy & pity for those still engaged in it. But what his secret interests & activities are—to what occupation he trotted off when we left him—I do not know.
Small boys write to him from New Zealand, & have to be answered. They bring out a "Hardy number" of a Japanese paper, which he produced. Talked too about Blunden.22 I think Mrs H. keeps him posted in the doings of the younger poets.
On the eve of her eleven-week summer retreat from London, VW spent the night of Monday 26 July at Long Barn with Vita Sackville-West, who motored her over to Rodmell the next afternoon. They arrived before LW,

who also came by car, with Clive and Julian Bell who were going to Charleston. Vita presented the Woolfs with a spaniel bitch puppy called Fanny, which they renamed Pinker (or Pinka).
The headed notes which follow were written at different times, only occasionally datable, between the end of July and the beginning of September. VW appears to have eschewed company to work at To the Lighthouse, although Raymond Mortimer stayed one week-end. On zo August the Woolfs dined with Maynard and Lydia Keynes at Tilton, the farmhouse half a mile from Charleston which, with its farm lands, Keynes had leased for 99 years from the local landowner, Viscount Gage. After dinner they all attended the now customary firework party at Charleston in celebration of Quentin s birthday.
Rodmell. 1926 As I am not going to milk my brains for a week, I shall here write the first pages of the greatest book in the world. This is what the book would be that was made entirely solely & with integrity of one's thoughts. Suppose one could catch them before they became "works of art."? Catch them hot & sudden as they rise in the mind—walking up Asheham hill for instance. Of course one cannot; for the process of language is slow & deluding. One must stop to find a word; then, there is the form of the sentence, soliciting one to fill it.
Art & Thought
What I thought was this: if art is based on thought, what is the transmuting process? I was telling myself the story of our visit to the Hardys. & I began to compose it: that is to say to dwell on Mrs Hardy leaning on the table, looking out, apathetically, vaguely; & so would soon bring everything into harmony with that as the dominant theme. But the actual event was different.
Next,
Writing by living people
I scarcely ever read it. but, owing to his giving me the books, am now reading C by M. Baring.23 I am surprised to find it as good as it is. But how good is it? Easy to say it is not a great book. But what qualities does it lack? That it adds nothing to one's vision of life, perhaps. Yet it is hard to find a serious flaw. My wonder is that entirely second rate work

like this, poured out in profusion by at least 20 people yearly, I suppose, has so much merit. Never reading it, I get into the way of thinking it non-existent. So it is, speaking with the utmost strictness. That is, it will not exist in 2026; but it has some existence now; which puzzles me a little. Now Clarence bores me; yet I feel this is important. And why?
[Saturday 31 July]
My own Brain
Here is a whole nervous breakdown in miniature. We came on Tuesday. Sank into a chair, could scarcely rise; everything insipid; tasteless, colourless. Enormous desire for rest. Wednesday—only wish to be alone in the open air. Air delicious—avoided speech; could not read. Thought of my own power of writing with veneration, as of something incredible, belonging to someone else; never again to be enjoyed by me. Mind a blank. Slept in my chair. Thursday. No pleasure in life whatsoever; but felt perhaps more attuned to existence. Character & idiosyncracy as Virginia Woolf completely sunk out. Humble & modest. Difficulty in thinking what to say. Read automatically, like a cow chewing cud. Slept in chair. Friday. Sense of physical tiredness; but slight activity of the brain. Beginning to take notice. Making one or two plans. No power of phrase making. Difficulty in writing to Lady Colefax. Saturday (today) much clearer & lighter. Thought I could write, but resisted, or found it impossible. A desire to read poetry set in on Friday. This brings back a sense of my own individuality. Read some Dante & Bridges, without troubling to understand, but got pleasure from them. Now I begin to wish to write notes, but not yet novel. But today senses quickening. No 'making up' power yet; no desire to cast scenes in my book. Curiosity about literature returning: want to read Dante, Havelock Ellis, & Berlioz autobiography; also to make a looking glass with shell frame. These processes have sometimes been spread over several weeks.
Proportions Changed
That in the evening, or on colourless days, the proportions of the landscape change suddenly. I saw people playing stoolball in the meadow: they appeared sunk far down on a flat board; & the downs raised high up, & mountainous round them. Detail was smoothed out. This was an extremely beautiful effect; the colours ofthe womens dresses also showing very bright & pure in the almost untinted surroundings. I knew, also, that the porportions were abnormal—as if I were looking between my legs.

Second Rate Art i.e. C. by Maurice Baring. Within its limits, it is not second rate, or there is nothing markedly so, at first go off. The limits are the proof of its non-existence.. He can only do one thing: himself to wit; charming, clean, modest sensitive Englishman: outside that radius, 6k it does not carry far nor illumine much, all is—as it should be; light, sure, proportioned, affecting even; told in so well bred a manner that nothing is exaggerated, all related, proportioned. I could read this for ever, I said. L. said one would soon be sick to death of it.
Wandervogeln of the sparrow tribe. Two resolute, sunburnt, dusty girls, in jerseys & short skirts, with packs on their backs, city clerks, or secretaries, tramping along the road in the hot sunshine at Ripe.24 My instinct at once throws up a screen, which condemns them: I think them in every way angular, awkward & self assertive. But all this is a great mistake. These screens shut me out. Have no screens, for screens are made out of our own integument; & get at the thing itself, which has nothing whatever in common with a screen. The screen making habit, though, is so universal, that probably it preserves our sanity. If we had not this device for shutting people off from our sympathies, we might, perhaps, dissolve utterly. Separateness would be impossible. But the screens are in the excess; not the sympathy.
Returning Health
This is shown by the power to make images: the suggestive power of
\     every sight & word is enormously increased. Shakespeare must have
had this to an extent which makes my normal state the state of a person
1    blind, deaf, dumb, stone-stockish & fish-blooded. And I have it compared
\   with poor Mrs Bartholomew almost to the extent that Shre has it compared
I  with me.25
[Monday 2 August]
Bank Holiday
Very fat woman, girl & man spend Bank Holiday—a day of complete sun & satisfaction—looking up family graves in the churchyard. 23

youngish men & women spend it tramping along with ugly black boxes on shoulders & arms, taking photographs. Man says to woman "Some of these quiet villages don't seem to know its bank holiday at all" in a tone of superiority & slight contempt.
The Married Relation
Arnold Bennett says that the horror of marriage lies in its 'dailiness'. All acuteness' of relationship is rubbed away by this. The truth is more like this. Life—say 4 days out of 7—becomes automatic; but on the 5 th day a bead of sensation (between husband & wife) forms, wh. is all the fuller & more sensitive because of the automatic customary unconscious days on either side. That is to say the year is marked by moments of great intensity. Hardy's 'moments of vision'.1 How can a relationship endure for any length of time except under these conditions?
Friday 3 September
Women in tea garden at Bramber—a sweltering hot day: rose trellises; white washed tables; lower middle classes; motor omnibuses constantly passing; bits of grey stone scattered on a paper strewn green sward all thats left of the Castle.1
Woman leaning over the table, taking command of the treat, attended by two elder women, whom she pays for, to girl waitress (a marmalade coloured fat girl, with a body like the softest lard, destined soon to marry, but as yet only 16 or so) Woman    "What can we have for tea?"
Girl          (very bored, arms akimbo) Cake, bread & butter, tea: Jam?
Woman    Have the wasps been troublesome? They get into the jam—
as if she suspected the jam would not be worth having. Girl          agrees.
Woman:   Ah, wasps have been very prominent this year. Girl          Thats right.
So she doesn't have jam. This amused me, I suppose.

For the rest, Charleston, Tilton, To the Lighthouse, Vita, expeditions: the summer dominated by a feeling of washing in boundless warm fresh air—such an August not come my way for years: bicycling; no settled work done, but advantage taken of air for going to the river, or over the downs. The novel is now easily within sight of the end, but this, mysteriously, comes no nearer. I am doing Lily on the lawn: but whether its her last lap, I don't know. Nor am I sure of the quality; the only certainty seems to be that after tapping my antennae in the air vaguely for an hour every morning I generally write with heat & ease till 12.30: & thus do my two pages.
[Sunday 5 September]
So it will be done, written over that is, in 3 weeks, I forecast, from today. What emerges? At this moment I'm casting about for an end. The problem is how to bring Lily & Mr R[amsay]. together & make a combination of interest at the end. I am feathering about with various ideas. The last chapter which I begin tomorrow is In the Boat: I had meant to end with R. climbing on to the rock. If so, what becomes [of] Lily & her picture? Should there be a final page about her & Carmichael looking at the picture & summing up R.'s character? In that case I lose the intensity of the moment. If this intervenes, between R. & the lighthouse, there's too much chop & change, I think. Could I do it in a parenthesis? so that one had the sense of reading the two things at the
same time?
I shall solve it somehow, I suppose. Then I must go in to the question of quality. I think it may run too fast & free, & so be rather thin. On the other hand, I think it is subtler & more human than J[acob's] R[oom] & Mrs D[alloway]. And I am encouraged by my own abundance as I write. It is proved, I think, that what I have to say is to be said in this manner. As usual, side stories are sprouting in great variety as I wind this up: a book of characters; the whole string being pulled out from some simple sentence, like Clara Pater's, "Don't you find that Barker's pins have no points to them?"2 I think I can spin out all their entrails this way; but it is hopelessly undramatic. It is all in oratio obliqua. Not quite all; for I have a few direct sentences. The lyric portions of To the L.

are collected in the io year lapse, & dont interfere with the text so much as usual. I feel as if it fetched its circle pretty completely this time: 6k I dont feel sure what the stock criticism will be. Sentimental? Victorian?
Then I must begin to plan out my book on literature for the Press.3 Six chapters. Why not groups of ideas, under some single heading—for example. Symbolism. God. Nature. Plot. Dialogue. Take a novel & see what the component parts are. Separate this, & bring under them instances of all the books which display them biggest. Probably this would pan out historically. One could spin a theory which wd bring the chapters together. I don't feel that I can read seriously[?] & exactly for it. Rather I want to sort out all the ideas that have accumulated in me.
Then I want to write a bunch of 'Outlines' to make money (for under a new arrangement, we're to share any money over £200 that I make): this I must leave rather to chance, according to what books come my way. I am frightfully contented these last few days, by the way. I dont quite understand it. Perhaps reason has something to do with it. Charleston & Tilton knocked me off my perch for a moment: Nessa & her children: Maynard & his carpets. My own gifts & shares seemed so moderate in comparison; my own fault too—a little more self control on my part, & we might have had a boy of 12, a girl of 10: This always rakes me wretched in the early hours. So I said, I am spoiling what I have. And thereupon settled [?] to exploit my own possessions to the full; I can make money & buy carpets; I can increase the pleasure of life enormously by living it carefully. No doubt, this is a rationalisation of a state which is not really of that nature. Probably I am very lucky. Mrs Allinson says she would like to look like me.4 Mary says I'm the only woman she loves. Nelly cooks admirably. Then, I am extremely happy walking on the downs. I dont want to be talking to Eddy at Charleston. I like to have space to spread my mind out in. Whatever I think, I can rap out, suddenly to L. We are somehow very detached, free, harmonious. I don't in the least want to hurry up & finish the time here. I want to go to Seaford 6k walk back over the downs; to go 6k see the house at East Chiltington; to breathe in more light 6k air; to see more grey hollows 6k gold cornfields 6k the first ploughed land shining white, with the gulls flickering. No: I dont want anyone to come here 6k interrupt. I am immensely busy. Hence I come to my moral, which is simply to enjoy what one does enjoy, without teasing oneself oh but Nessa has

children, Maynard carpets. I might go & stay with Ethel [Sands, in Normandy]. For my own wishes are always definite enough to give me a lead, one way or another; & the chief joy in life is to follow these lights; I am now almost entirely surrounded by sheep. God knows, I wish we could buy the terrace, & have a garden all round the lodge—but this is not a serious diminution of joy.5
Clive & Mary came over yesterday in brilliant sun. We sat on the millstones, (one sheep has a tail like a bell-rope—the others are all bit short.) Wells. Hardy. Maynard. Richardson, [word illegible]. Christabel— going to Greece for a month with Lesley Jowitt. Maupassant's metaphors —The Questionnaire. Lytton's harem—Their dulness—Carrington a cook who doesn't go out on Sundays. Whether Eddy is clever or not. Tonks & Steer & Moore—Tonks in love with Mary, Clive insists; she is modest. So we talked.6 Then I drove with them to the Laye, walked up the down behind Asheham & let all that wind & sun blow through the crazy sails of my old windmill, which gives me so much pleasure still.71 forget what I thought about: did not think, I suppose; was all in a thrill of emotion at my being liked by Mary & being a success, &c. Home to music, my new 15/- table, talk with L.: a sense of great happiness & ease. Went & looked at the stars, but could not get quite the right sense of amazement (I can get this really well at times) because L. said "Now come in. Its too cold to be out"

Monday 13 September
The blessed thing is coming to an [end] I say to myself with a groan. Its like some prolonged rather painful & yet exciting process of nature, which one desires inexpressibly to have over. Oh the relief of waking & thinking its done—the relief, & the disappointment, I suppose. I am talking of To the Lighthouse. I am exacerbated by the fact that I spent 4 days last week hammering out de Quincey, which has been lying about since June; so refused £30 to write on Willa Cather; & now shall be quit in a week I hope of this unprofitable fiction, & could have wedged in Willa before going back. So I should have had £70 of my years 200 ready made by October: (my greed is immense: I want to have £50 of my own in the Bank to buy Persian carpets, pots, chairs &c.) Curse Richmond, Curse The Times, Curse my own procrastinations & nerves. I shall do Cobden Sanderson & Mrs Hemans & make something by them however.8 As for the book [To the Lighthouse]—Morgan said he felt 'This is a failure' as he finished The passage to India. I feel—what? A little stale this last week or two from steady writing. But also a little triumphant. If my feeling is correct, this is the greatest stretch I've put my method to, & I think it holds. By this I mean that I have been dredging up more feelings & character, I imagine. But Lord knows, until I look at my haul. This is only my own feeling in process. Odd how I'm haunted by that damned criticism of Janet Case's "its all dressing... technique. (Mrs Dalloway). The CR. has substance". But then in ones strained state any fly has liberty to settle, & its always the gadflies. Muir praising me intelligently has comparatively little power to encourage —when I'm working that is—when the ideas halt.9 And this last lap, in the boat, is hard, because the material is not so rich as it is with Lily on the lawn: I am forced to be more direct & more intense. I am making

some use of symbolism, I observe; & I go in dread of 'sentimentality'. Is the whole theme open to that charge? But I doubt that any theme is in itself good or bad. It gives a chance to ones peculiar qualities—thats all. Then I'm concerned whether to stay with Ethel Sands or not: whether to buy a dress or not. Then I'm astonishingly happy in the country—a state of mind which, if I did not dislike hyphens, I should hyphen, to show that it is a state by itself.
We took Angus over the downs towards Falmer yesterday. After all these years, we have discovered some of the loveliest, loneliest, most surprising downland in these parts: lovelier I think than our rival the Seaford-Tikon down over which we walked in broiling sun last Thursday. How it beat on our heads, made poor puppy pant. Lydia & Maynard came to tea.
Wednesday 15 September Sometimes I shall use the Note form: for instance this
A State of Mind
Woke up perhaps at 3. Oh its beginning its coming—the horror— physically like a painful wave swelling about the heart—tossing me up. I'm unhappy unhappy! Down—God, I wish I were dead. Pause. But why am I feeling this? Let me watch the wave rise. I watch. Vanessa. Children. Failure. Yes; I detect that. Failure failure. (The wave rises). Oh they laughed at my taste in green paint! Wave crashes. I wish I were dead! I've only a few years to live I hope. I cant face this horror any more—(this is the wave spreading out over me).
This goes on; several times, with varieties of horror. Then, at the crisis, instead of the pain remaining intense, it becomes rather vague. I doze. I wake with a start. The wave again! The irrational pain: the sense of failure; generally some specific incident, as for example my taste in green paint, or buying a new dress, or asking Dadie for the week end,
tacked on.
At last I say, watching as dispassionately as I can, Now take a pull of yourself. No more of this. I reason. I take a census of happy people & unhappy. I brace myself to shove to throw to batter down. I begin to march blindly forward. I feel obstacles go down. I say it doesn't matter. Nothing matters. I become rigid 6k straight, & sleep again, & half wake & feel the wave beginning & watch the light whitening & wonder how, this time, breakfast & daylight will overcome it; & then hear L. in the passage & simulate, for myself as well as for him, great cheerfulness; &
no

generally am cheerful, by the time breakfast is over. Does everyone go through this state? Why have I so little control? It is not creditable, nor lovable. It is the cause of much waste & pain in my life.
Tuesday 28 September
Every day I have meant to record a state of mind. But it has always disappeared (characteristically) yet recurred often enough to make it one of some importance. It is raining hard this evening; we have entered the calm period of Nelly's departure. So I will try, before my fingers chill & my mind wanders to the fire, to write here what I can remember.
Intense depression: I have to confess that this has overcome me several times since September 6th (I think that, or thereabouts was the date.) It is so strange to me that I cannot get it right—the depression, I mean, which does  not come from  something definite, but from  nothing. "Where there is nothing" the phrase came (back) to me, as I sat at the table in the drawing room. Of course I was interested; & discovered that, for the first time for many years, I had been idle without being ill. We had been walking, expeditioning, in the hot fine weather. I was writing the last pages of To the Lighthouse (finished, provisionally, Sept 16th). Somehow, my reading had lapsed. I was hunting no hares. One night I got hold of Geoffrey Scott's book on Architecture, & a little spark of motive power awoke in me.10 This is a warning then; never to cease the use of the brain. So I used my brain. Then, owing to mismanagement, no one came to stay, & I got very few letters; & the high pure hot days went on & on; & this blankness persisted, & I began to suspect my book ofthe same thing; & there was Nessa humming & booming & flourishing over the hill; & one night we had a long long argument. Vita started it, by coming over with Plank,11 & L. (I say) spoilt the visit by glooming because I said he had been angry. He shut up, & was caustic. He denied this, but admitted that my habits of describing him, & others, had this effect often. I saw myself, my brilliancy,genius, charm, beauty (ckc. 6kc.— the attendants who float me through so many years) diminish & disappear. One is in truth rather an elderly dowdy fussy ugly incompetent woman vain, chattering 6k futile. I saw this vividly, impressively. Then he said our relations had not been so good lately. On analysing my state of mind

I admitted that I had been irritated, first by the prevalency of the dogs (Grizzle on heat too.12) Secondly by his assumption that we can afford to saddle ourselves with a whole time gardener, build or buy him a cottage, & take in the terrace to be garden. Then, I said, we shall be tying ourselves to come here; shall never travel; & it will be assumed that Monks House is the hub of the world. This it certainly is not, I said, to me; nor do I wish to spend such a measure of our money on gardens, when we cannot buy rugs, beds or good arm chairs. L. was, I think, hurt at this, & I was annoyed at saying it, yet did it, not angrily, but in the interests of freedom. Too many women give way on this point, & secretly grudge their unselfishness in silence—a bad atmosphere. Our atmosphere decidedly cleared, after this, Tommie [Tomlin] came for the week end, & I am once more full of work, at high pressure, interested, & quite unable, I see, to make plain even to my own eyes, my season of profound
despondency.
If I wish to avoid this in future, I recommend, first, incessant brain activity; reading, & planning; second, a methodical system of inviting people here (which is possible, with Nelly obedient & gay); third, increased mobility. For next year, I shall arrange perhaps to go definitely to Ethel Sands. With my motor I shall be more mobile.
But it is always a question whether I wish to avoid these glooms. In part they are the result of getting away by oneself, & have a psychological interest which the usual state of working & enjoying lacks. These 9 weeks give one a plunge into deep waters; which is a little alarming, but full of interest. All the rest of the year one's (I daresay rightly) curbing & controlling this odd immeasurable soul. When it expands, though one is frightened & bored & gloomy, it is as I say to myself, awfully queer. There is an edge to it which I feel of great importance, once in a way. One goes down into the well & nothing protects one from the assault of truth. Down there I cant write or read; I exist however. I am. Then I ask myself what I am? & get a closer though less flattering answer than I should on the surface—where, to tell the truth, I get more praise than is right. But the praise will go; one will be left alone with this queer being in old age. I am glad to find it on the whole so interesting, though so acutely unpleasant. Also, I can, by taking pains, be much more considerate of L.'s feelings; & so keep more steadily at our ordinary level of intimacy & ease: a level, I think, no other couple so long married, reaches, 6k keeps so constantly.

Thursday 30 September
I wished to add some remarks to this, on the mystical side of this solitude; how it is not oneself but something in the universe that one's left with. It is this that is frightening & exciting in the midst of my profound gloom, depression, boredom, whatever it is: One sees a fin passing far out. What image can I reach to convey what I mean? Really there is none I think. The interesting thing is that in all my feeling & thinking I have never come up against this before. Life is, soberly & accurately, the oddest affair; has in it the essence of reality. I used to feel this as a child—couldn't step across a puddle once I remember, for thinking, how strange—what am I? &c. But by writing I dont reach anything. All I mean to make is a note of a curious state of mind. I hazard the guess that it may be the         Perhaps The
impulse behind another book. At present my mind         ,q           ^
is totally blank & virgin of books.* I want to watch & see how the idea at first occurs. I want to trace my own process.
I was depressed again today because Vita did not come (yet relieved at the same time); had to hold L.'s ladder in the garden, when I wanted to write or to try on Nessa's dress; & slightly afraid that this dress is not very successful.
But I am shelving the dress problem on these principles. I am having cheap day clothes; & a good dress from Brooke; & I am being less pernickety about keeping to limits, as I have only to write & stir myself, to make, I wager, quite £50 extra in the year for my own extravagances. No longer shall I let a coat for £3 floor me in the middle of the night, or be afraid to lunch out because "I've no clothes." A broader & bolder grasp is what is wanted. Here I am going into the question of order & so on, like a housekeeper, taking in supplies. Soon, this time next week, I shall have no time for glooming or introspection. It will be "When may I come & see you?" Already Betty Potter has begun.13
Now I must scheme a little at my book of criticism.
The Woolfs returned to London on 4 October; there are no entries in VW's diary until 30 October, nor does LW resume his laconic record until 21 October.

Saturday 30 October
It will be when may I come & see you!—too true a prophecy, though made in the damp & solitude of Rodmell. Monday, Ozzie Dickinson, Wednesday, Lady Colefax, Thursday Morgan to meet Abel Chevalley, dine Wells to meet Arnold Bennett, Friday to Monday Long Barn.1 So the week slips or sticks through my fingers; rage misery joy, dulness elation mix: I am the usual battlefield of emotions; alternately think of buying chairs & clothes; plod with some method revising To the Lighthouse; quarrel with Nelly (who was to catch the afternoon train today because I told a lie about a telephone) & so we go on. Maurice Baring & the Sitwells send me their books;2 Leonard forges ahead, now doing what he calls "correspondence"; the Press creaks a little at its hinges; Mrs C[artwright]. has absconded with my spectacles: I find Buggers bores; like the normal male; & should now be developing my book for the Press. All these things shoulder each other out across the screen of my brain. At intervals, I begin to think (I note this, as I am going to watch for the advent of a book) of a solitary woman musing[?] a book of ideas about life. This has intruded only once or twice, & very vaguely: it is a dramatisation of my mood at Rodmell. It is to be an endeavour at something mystic, spiritual; the thing that exists when we aren't there.
Among external things, we were at Cambridge for the week end; kept warm at the Bull—& there's a good subject—The Hotel.3 Many people from Macclesfield talking about motor cars. Mothers, to me pathetic, looking half shyly at their sons, as if deprecating their age. A whole life

opened to me: father, mother, son, daughter. Father alone has wine. An enormous man, like an advertisement of Power: sits in chair. Daddy you'll be miserable in it says girl, herself bovine. Mother a mere wisp; sits with eyes shut; had spent hours driving up writing characters of maids. Shall I remember any of this?
Then Gosse introducing Vita at Royal------something. I never saw
the whole hierarchy of lit. so plainly exposed. Gosse the ornament on the tea pot: beneath him file on file of old stout widows whose husbands had been professors, beetle specialists doubtless, meritorious dons; & these good people, ruminating tea, & reflecting all the depths of the suburbs tinctured with literature, dear Vita told them were "The Hollow Men."4 Her address was read in sad sulky tones like those ofa schoolboy; her pendulous rich society face, glowing out under a black hat at the end of the smoky dismal room, looked very ancestral & like a picture under glass in a gallery. She was fawned upon by the little dapper grocer Gosse, who kept spinning round on his heel to address her compliments & to scarify Bolshevists; in an ironical voice which seemed to ward off what might be said of him; & to be drawing round the lot of them thicker & thicker, the red plush curtains of respectability. There was Vita, who was too innocent to see it, Guedalla, & Drinkwater.5 I dont regret my wildest, foolishest, utterance, if it gave the least crack to this respectability. But needless to say, no word of mine has had any effect whatever. Gosse will survive us all. Now how does he do it? Yet he seemed to me, with his irony & his scraping, somehow uneasy. A kind of black doormat got up & appeared to be Lady Gosse. So home, with Dotty in a rage, because she was palmed off with Plank. She did contrive to get here though in the end. One night I went in with Vita after the play. She was lying asleep at Mount Street, in a flat at the top of the house: large pale furniture about dimly seen—a dog on her bed. She woke up chattering & hysterical. Virginia Woolf Virginia Woolf My God! Virginia Woolf is in the room. For Gods Sake Vita dont turn the lights on. No light you fool! But I

cant see to get the allella, mumbled Vita.6 She got it though. We sat & drank. Dusky shapes of glasses & things, a room I had never seen; a woman I scarcely knew; Vita there between us, intimate wi' both; flattery, extravagance, complete inner composure on my part, & so home.
The first three weeks of November, when no diary was written, appear to have been very fully taken up with work on To the Lighthouse, with Vita {and a visit to her at Long Barn, 6-8 November), with social gatherings and innumerable people. The dinner party on 4 November at the H. G. Wellses', where the Woolfs met the Shaws and Arnold Bennett, was recorded by the latter in his journals ofthe Woolfs he wrote: 'Both gloomy, these two... But I liked both of them in spite of their naughty treatment of me in the press.'
Tuesday 23 November
Here I must resolve first of all to find some long solid book to read. What? Tristram Shandy? French memoirs? This is on top of a discussion, at tea about Angus. He dont do, L. says: will never make a manager. So then shall it be another attempt, or Cape, or Seeker?1 These difficulties recur. I should not much like writing for Cape; yet if the Press is sagging on our shoulders, there is little sense in waiting on. Next year L. thinks we could sell to advantage. It gives one a full life: but then life is so full already. Colefax complicates the scene—Colefax is the death of this book. Aren't I always reading her scrawls or answering them. This culminated last week in her dining alone with me, off cold chicken. I found us talking socially, not intimately, she in pearls (shams Vita says) popping up one light after another: like the switch board at the telephone exchange at the mention of names. Geoffrey Scott, Percy Lubbock[,] whoever it might be. Perfectly competent, &, for her purpose, efficient. She is, I maintain, a woman of the world: has all her senses tuned to that pitch. The machine doesn't work in private, though she was very anxious, poor aspiring, slightly suspicious & uneasy woman, that it should. She told me how she had lived till she married running after old ladies with their knitting. So, on marriage, but she was only 19, had kicked her

heels up: determined to live, like Violet's mother, who leant out of the Palace window at Auckland 6k said, to an old man selling kippers, Is this life?2 But now, aged 50, she asks, Is this life? again—rushing round, dining 6k giving dinners; never able to concentrate in a corner, 6k secretly, in my opinion, not desiring it but pretending it, as she has the habit of pretence. This is all right in her, but wrong in me. So we don't altogether amalgamate; but I have my reservations, she hers. In came Dadie, to our relief, somewhat; then Sir Arthur, breezy, cheery, competent, patting her, controlling her, petted by her (she reverted to her arch girlish days, when she could eat soup 6k potatoes without any thought of her figure) sitting on the edge of my shabby dirty down at heels arm chair.3
All this rushes on apace. Fame grows. Chances of meeting this person, doing that thing, accumulate. Life is as I've said since I was io, awfully interesting—if anything, quicker, keener at 44 than 24—more desperate I suppose, as the river shoots to Niagara—my new vision of death; active, positive, like all the rest, exciting; 8c of great importance—as an experience.
'The one experience I shall never describe' I said to Vita yesterday. She was sitting on the floor in her velvet jacket 6k red striped silk shirt, I knotting her pearls into heaps of great lustrous eggs. She had come up to see me—so we go on—a spirited, creditable affair, I think, innocent (spiritually) 6k all gain, I think; rather a bore for Leonard, but not enought to worry him. The truth is one has room for a good many relationships. Then she goes back again to Persia, with Leigh Ashton— that putty faced low voiced rather beaten cur, who is always slinking off with his tail between his legs, but gives, they say, oyster suppers.
I am re-doing six pages of Lighthouse daily. This is not I think, so quick as Mrs D.: but then I find much of it very sketchy, 6k have to improvise on the typewriter. This I find much easier than re-writing in pen 6k ink. My present opinion is that it is easily the best of my books, fuller than J.'s R. 6k less spasmodic, occupied with more interesting things than Mrs D. 6k not complicated with all that desperate accompaniment of madness. It is freer 6k subtler I think. Yet I have no idea yet of any other to follow it: which may mean that I have made my method perfect, 6k it will now stay like this, 6k serve whatever use I wish to put it to. Before, some development of the method brought fresh subjects in

view, because I saw the chance of being able to say them. Yet I am now & then haunted by some semi mystic very profound life of a woman, which shall all be told on one occasion; & time shall be utterly obliterated; future shall somehow blossom out of the past. One incident—say the fall of a flower—might contain it. My theory being that the actual event practically does not exist—nor time either. But I dont want to force this. I must make up my Series book.
On 4 December VW went again to Long Barn to spend the week-end with Vita Sackville-West; LW, having had Grille put down, spent the night with his brother Herbert at Cookham.
Saturday 11 December
I have never been able to afford 2/ for a good piece of washleather, yet I buy a dozen boxes of matches for 1/6.
I am giving up the hope of being well dressed.
Violet Dickinson has just had a third serious operation & I went to an old Curiosity shop instead of going to see her.1
Leonard is lunching with Maynard & a great registered parcel has just been delivered containing Dadie's dissertation.2
It is now close on 3.30.
Some superstition prevents me from reading Yeats' autobiography as I should like.3
I am very happy at the moment: having arranged my week on the whole well.
But I have been rather unscupulous. I have put off the Stephens, at Thorpe: & shall probably stay at Knole.
A few thoughts to fill up time waiting for dinner.
An article all about London:
How Vita's inkpot flowered on her table.
Logan's vanity: I write everything 8 times— (So thats how its done I thought: he thought thats the only way to produce writing like mine)

But all my thoughts perish instantly. I make them up so vast. How to blunt the sting of an unpleasant remark: to say it over & over & over again. Walked to Violet's; took her a red carnation & a white one. My feelings quickened as I drew near. I visualised the operation as I stood on the doorstep.
I also have made up a passage for The Lighthouse: on people going away & the effect on one's feeling for them.
But reading Yeats turns my sentences one way: reading Sterne turns them another.



1927

Friday 14 January
This is out of order, but I have no new book, & so must record here (& it was here I recorded the beginning of The Lighthouse) must record here the end. This moment I have finished the final drudgery. It is now complete for Leonard to read on Monday. Thus I have done it some days under the year, & feel thankful to be out of it again. Since October 25th I have been revising & retyping (some parts 3 times over) & no doubt I should work at it again; but I cannot. What I feel is that it is a hard muscular book, which at this age proves that I have something in me. It has not run out & gone flabby, at least such is my feeling before reading it over.
Sunday 23 January
Well Leonard has read To the Lighthouse, & says it is much my best book, & it is a 'masterpiece'. He said this without my asking. I came back from Knole & sat without asking him. He calls it entirely new 'a psychological poem', is his name for it. An improvement upon Dalloway: more interesting. Having won this great relief, my mind dismisses the whole thing, as usual; & I forget it, & shall only wake up & be worried again over proofs & then when it appears.
We went to Cornwall (dare I characterise Will hearing him talk next door—it is Sunday—he is dining with us). He is a water-blooded waspish little man, all on edge, vain, peevish, nervous. Ka is matronly, but substantial. Some views I retain—one of the valley in the evening light— but others were only a dull impression of life suspended 6k frozen, & the chin sawing of Mervyn: all chapped, becolded.1 We came home for these

reasons a day early, & next morning I had a letter from the New York H[erald]. & T[ribune] asking me to go there, passage paid, 120 in my pocket &, perhaps, expenses, & write 4 articles. We accepted, on conditions; but have not heard yet. Meanwhile we hesitate, for if Leonard came, we should probably be £150 out of pocket. So it seems. The adventure is tempting. But the grind of moneymaking is scarcely to be endured unnecessarily. We could go to Greece, or Italy for less.
Then Nessa has gone, poor dear creature. I came in two days ago & found her white at the telephone; Elly at the other end saying that Duncan's illness was probably typhoid.2 I think a left handed marriage makes these moments more devastating: a sense remains, I think of hiding one's anguish; of insecurity. Angus writes the most cautious alarming letters. Anyhow she went yesterday in a snowstorm, & we kissed on the pavement in the snow. We are very intimate—a great solace to me. Vita goes on Saturday.3 Tomorrow I dine with her at Colefaxes: a brilliant party: no clothes: hair down my back as usual. Does it very much matter? I reached that point of philosophy at Knole the other night, with the bountiful womanly Mrs Rubens & his Lordship the figure of an English nobleman, decayed, dignified, smoothed, effete; respectable I think in his modest way.4 But I never have enjoyed a party. Balls at Buckingham
been appointed a member of the Labour Party Advisory Committee on International Affairs, of which LW was Secretary. At a meeting on 19 January the two of them had been asked to draft a commentary, and presumably it was this they were discussing as VW wrote. Will's younger brother Mervyn Nevil Arnold-Forster (1888-1927), who had fought with the Grenadier Guards and was awarded a MC, was later diis year to be considered as manager of the Hogarth Press, but died on 6 May 1927 from pneumonia and the delayed effects ofhis war service (see below, 16 May 1927).

Palace are worth looking at. He spends the day sitting on Com[mi]tees at Maidstone; interviews parsons about livings; likes chess & crime. Vita took me over the 4 acres of building, which she loves: too little conscious beauty for my taste: smallish rooms looking on to buildings: no views: yet one or two things remain: Vita stalking in her Turkish dress, attended by small boys, down the gallery, wafting them on like some tall sailing ship—a sort of covey of noble English life: dogs walloping, children crowding, all very free ek stately: & [a] cart bringing wood in to be sawn by the great circular saw. How do you see that? I asked Vita. She said she saw it as something that had gone on for hundreds of years. They had brought wood in from the Park to replenish the great fires like this for centuries: & her ancestresses had walked so on the snow with their great dogs bounding by them. All the centuries seemed lit up, the past expressive, articulate; not dumb & forgotten; but a crowd of people stood behind, not dead at all; not remarkable; fair faced, long limbed; affable; & so we reach the days of Elizabeth quite easily. After tea, looking for letters of Dryden's to show me, she tumbled out a love letter of Ld Dorset's (17th century) with a lock of his soft gold tinted hair which I held in my hand a moment.5 One had a sense of links fished up into the light which are usually submerged. Otherwise no particular awe or any great sense of difference or distinction. They are not a brilliant race. The space & comeliness of it all struck me. I came home to Marjorie Strachey,6 Tom Eliot, Nessa & Roger. A little constricted our society: no talk of the clergy or of the country; but how lively & agile compared with the
[text ends]
DIARY XVI Thursday 3 February
Fate always contrives that I begin the new year in February. I ask, why another volume? (but here's an innovation: this is not a book but a block —so lazy am I about making writing books nowadays). What is the purpose of them? L. taking up a volume the other day said Lord save him if I died first & he had to read through these. My handwriting deteriorates. And do I say anything interesting? I can always waste an idle hour reading them; & then, oh yes, I shall write my memoirs out of them, one of these days.

That reminds me of the Webbs: those 36 strenuous hours at Liphook, in an emphatic lodging house, with blue books in the passages; & those entirely devoted—by which I mean those entirely integrated people.1 Their secret is that they have by nature no divisions of soul to fritter them away: their impact is solid & entire. Without eyes & ears (but Mrs Webb listens in & prefers Mozart to Handel, if I may guess) one can come down with more of a weight upon bread & butter or whatever the substance is before one. On a steely watery morning we swiftly tramped over a heathy common talking, talking. In their efficiency & glibness one traces perfectly adjusted machinery; but talk by machinery does not charm, or suggest: it cuts the grass of the mind close at the roots. I'm too hurried to write. Mrs W. is far less ornamental than of old: wispy untidy drab, with a stain on her skirt & a key on her watch chain; as if she had cleared the decks & rolled her sleeves & was waiting for the end, but working.
Saturday 12 February
Exactly what has happened in the Clive Mary affair I cannot say. Did he not sheepishly admit in the kitchen the other night that he was putting it off till March? & then, casually & jauntily tell me as if by chance, the other afternoon, here, that he was going after all. But wont Mary mind? What if she does?—that was practically his answer.2
Vita's prose is too fluent. I've been reading it, & it makes my pen run. When I've read a classic, I am curbed &—not castrated: no, the opposite; I cant think of the word at the moment.
Had I been writing P[assenger] to T[eheran] I should have run off whole pools of this coloured water; & then (I think) found my own method of attack. It is my distinction as a writer I think to get this clear & my expression exact. Were I writing travels I should wait till some angle emerged: & go for that. The method of writing smooth narrative

cant be right; things dont happen in one's mind like that. But she is very skilful & golden voiced.
This makes me think that I have to read To the L. tomorrow & Monday, straight through in print; straight through, owing to my curious methods, for the first time. I want to read largely & freely once: then to niggle over details.
But I am forgetting, after 3 days, the most important event in my life since marriage—so Clive described it: Bobo shingled me. Mr Cizec has bingled me.3 I am short haired for life. Having no longer, I think, any claims to beauty, the convenience of this alone makes it desirable. Every morning I go to take up brush & twist that old coil round my finger & fix it with hairpins & then with a start of joy, no I needn't. In front there is no change; behind I'm like the rump of a partridge. This robs dining out of half its terrors; in token of which, I'm 'dining out' (the distinction is clear: Roger & Clive & Bloomsbury aint dining out) with Ethel [Sands] & with the [Hubert] Hendersons.
For the rest—its been a gay tropical kind of autumn, with so much Vita 6k Knole & staying away: we have launched ourselves a little more freely perhaps from work & the Press. But now with Nessa away, Clive away, Duncan away, Vita away, the strenuous time sets in: I'm reading & writing at a great pace; mean to 'do' Morgan;4 have a fling at my book on fiction; & make all the money we want for Greece & a motor car. I may note that the first symptoms of Lighthouse are unfavourable. Roger, it is clear did not like Time Passes. Harpers & the Forum have refused serial rights; Brace writes, I think, a good deal less enthusiastically than of Mrs D. But these opinions refer to the rough copy, unrevised.5 And

anyhow I feel callous: L.'s opinion keeps me steady; I'm neither one thing nor the other.
Yesterday Wells asked us to publish a pamphlet for him.6 This is a great rise in the world for us; & comes on top of rather a flat talk with Angus. L. says he doesn't "manage". Angus refuses to budge an inch. He can't see the point of it. As he says, too, whats he to do if he leaves? He doesn't want to leave. Though sometimes 'fed up' he likes it better than most work. But I'm persuaded we need, the press needs, a fanatic at the moment; not this quiet easygoing gentlemanliness. I am annoyed at doing cards, & envelopes; & L. does twice the work I do.
Monday 21 February
Why not invent a new kind of play—as for instance
Woman thinks: . . .
He does.
Organ Plays.
She writes.
They say:
She sings:
Night speaks:
They miss I think it must be something in this line—though I cant now see what. Away from facts: free; yet concentrated; prose yet poetry; a novel & a play.
But today is
Monday 28 February
& I have got into another stream of thought, if thought it can be called.
Let me collect a few logs, drifting in my mind, to represent the past few days.
Clive, standing at the door.
had been pulled (by R. & R. Clark, Edinburgh) and that three at least had been sent to America. There are discrepancies between the text of the English and of the American edition (printed for Harcourt Brace by Quinn & Boden Company, N.J.), notably in the section 'Time Passes'. It thus seems likely, particularly in view of Roger Fry's reported opinion, that VW made emendations on her proof which were effected by Clarks but not transmitted to America; and thus that the English edition embodies her final revision. 6. Democracy Under Revision, the text of a lecture to be given by H. G. Wells at the Sorbonne on 15 March 1927, was published by the Hogarth Press in March (HP Checklist 151).

She cries for the moon.
This was said of Mary. With it he went to Cassis for 3 months.
Again, If Mrs Woolf dont think me worth a penny stamp I said—this being Rose Bartholomew standing at her cottage door on Friday evening. Phrases suddenly seem to me very significant, & then I forget them. My brain is rather stale. Do I like The Lighthouse? I think I was disappointed. But God knows. I have to read it again.
A letter from Vita & Dottie just come. She is not an explicit letter writer. But I must be fond of her, genuinely, to start as I did at the sight of Dottie's hand, thinking she wrote to say V. was ill.
For the rest I think Cowper is a good poet. I'd like to write about him. Shall we go to Greece, Italy or France? I'm glad I didn't dedicate my book to Roger. This I verified in his presence, the other night [23 February]. He dined here with Raymond. Raymond is intellectually speaking underbred. Roger a pure aristocrat. Philip [Ritchie] came in, his little green eyes hazed bunged up with drink. So to Rodmell. And now the wind is making the tin screen over the gas fire rattle. How we protect ourselves from the elements! Coming back last night I thought, owing to civilisation, I, who am now cold, wet, & hungry, can be warm & satisfied & listening to a Mozart 4tet in 15 minutes. And so I was.
That ring may be Tom. No. Tom dont run upstairs—only the lower classes do that.
And I dont think I shall go out in the rain, though I am going to spend this week in long romantic London walks. I have successfully broken the neck of that screaming grey goose—society. There's nothing to be afraid of in dining with Ethel or Sibyl—& I'm shingled now. One spins round for a moment & then settles on one's feet. But about the Soul: the soul has sunk to the bottom. I am empty headed tonight, feeling the lack of Nessa rather, & all the prelude of Spring—the vague discomfort & melancholy & a feeling of having come to anchor. But I intend to work harder & harder. If they—the respectables, my friends, advise me against The Lighthouse, I shall write memoirs; have a plan already to get historical manuscripts & write Lives of the Obscure:7 but why do I pretend I should take advice? After a holiday the old ideas will come to me as usual; seeming fresher, more important than ever; & I shall be off again, feeling that extraordinary exhilaration, that ardour & lust of creation—which is odd, if what I create is, as it well may be, wholly bad.

Today I bought a new watch. Last night I crept into L.'s bed to make up a sham quarrel about paying our fares to Rodmell. Now to finish Passage to India.
Saturday 5 March
Both rather headachy & fatigued. This is the last slope up of the year which is always worst. Finishing, correcting the last proofs that is to say, of a book is always a screw. Then I have written rather incessantly, one thing after another. A holiday, without dinner to order, or telephone to answer, or people to talk to, will be a divine miracle. We go to Cassis on the 30th; then to Sicily; so home by Rome. What could be more to my heart. Often I sit & think of looking at things. The greed of my eye is insatiable. To think of seeing a new place fills me with excitement. I now make up pictures of Sicily. Think of the Campagna grey in the evening.
I have been hard pressed about the Eliot fund, & behind the scenes of ladies diplomacy—Chrissie & Sibyl, that is:1 so much suavity, so much distrust of each other, & so great a desire for compliments. Molly came to tea; could not get her mind off her troubles, first laughing at them— Desmond all right, & so on: then brushing laughter aside, & becoming more 6k more openly worried. Sibyl had cross examined her about her debts. To such indignities poverty exposes one. So I told her the truth, or what I hope will be the truth: that friends are subscribing enough to send them abroad, Oh how wonderful! she exclaimed, she never having seen Italy or Spain all these years. "I'm afraid Desmond has had rather an unhappy life," she said. "But then think of Lytton ... Of course I was extravagant about doing the house up . . . but then we can let it." "Rachel goes for long walks at night & reads Coleridge—Oh Desmond's hopeless—he's like a dog who runs out if the door is open." So we laid our heads together over the fire; & felt very sisterly & sympathetic. I distrust though the pleasure one gets in helping one's friends.
Monday 14 March
Although annoyed that I have not heard from Vita by this post nor

yet last week, annoyed sentimentally, & partly from vanity—still I must record the conception last night between 12 & one ofa new book. I said I would be on the watch for symptoms of this extremely mysterious process. For some weeks, since finishing The Lighthouse I have thought myself virgin, passive, blank of ideas. I toyed vaguely with some thoughts of a flower whose petals fall; of time all telescoped into one lucid channel through wh. my heroine was to pass at will. The petals falling. But nothing came of it. I shirked the effort—seemed to have no impulse that way, supposed that I had worked out my vein. Faith Henderson came to tea, &, valiantly beating the waters of conversation, I sketched the possibilities which an unattractive woman, penniless, alone, might yet bring into being. I began imagining the position—how she would stop a motor on the Dover road, 6k so get to Dover: cross the channel: ckc. It struck me, vaguely, that I might write a Defoe narrative for fun. Suddenly between twelve 6k one I conceived a whole fantasy to be called "The Jessamy Brides"—why, I wonder? I have rayed round it several scenes. Two women, poor, solitary at the top of a house. One can see anything (for this is all fantasy) the Tower Bridge, clouds, aeroplanes. Also old men listening in the room over the way. Everything is to be tumbled in pall mall. It is to be written as I write letters at the top of my speed: on the ladies of Llangollen; on Mrs Fladgate; on people passing.2 No attempt is to be made to realise the character. Sapphism is to be suggested. Satire is to be the main note—satire 6k wildness. The Ladies are to have Constantinople in view. Dreams of golden domes. My own lyric vein is to be satirised. Everything mocked. And it is to end with three dots ... so. For the truth is I feel the need of an escapade after these serious poetic
experimental books whose form is always so Orlando leading to The closely considered. I want to kick up my heels Waves. (July 8th 1933) 6k be off. I want to embody all those innumerable little ideas 6k tiny stories which flash into my mind at all seasons. I think this will be great fun to write; 6k it will rest my head before starting the very serious, mystical poetical work which I want to come next. Meanwhile, before I can touch the Jessamy Brides, I have to write my book on fiction 6k that wont be done till January, I suppose. I might dash off a page or two now 6k then by way of experiment. And it is possible that the idea will evaporate. Anyhow this records the odd hurried unexpected way in which these things suddenly create themselves—one thing on top of another in about an

hour. So I made up Jacob's Room looking at the fire at Hogarth House; so I made up The Lighthouse one afternoon in the square here.
Monday 21 March
This is the kind of evening when one seems to be abroad: the window is open; the yellows & greys of the houses seem exposed to the summer; there is that rumour & clamour which reminds one of Italy. Almost in a week now we shall be starting. I dislike the days before going. I went to buy clothes today & was struck by my own ugliness. Like Edith Sitwell I can never look like other people—too broad, tall, flat, with hair hanging. And now my neck is so ugly . . . But I never think of this at home.
How disturbing the summer is! We shall sit reading with the windows open tonight, but my mind will only just touch the page & float off. Something unsettled & melancholy will be in the air. Also it seems the threshold of that vast burning London summer, which alarms me slightly, Vita & Harold will be back; my book will be out. We shall sit in the Square. But I shall not let things worry me much, (so I say—but it is still only March.) We shall have a week at Cassis—a strange resurrection of us all abroad. Many years have gone since Nessa, Clive 6k I met there. Never with Leonard of course.3
My brain is ferociously active. I want to have at my books as if I were conscious of the lapse of time, age & death. Dear me, how lovely some parts of The Lighthouse are! Soft & pliable, 6k I think deep, 6k never a word wrong for a page at a time. This I feel about the dinner party, 6k the children in the boat; but not of Lily on the lawn. That I do not much like. But I like the end,\
I get too many letters to answer nowadays. Edith Sitwell came to tea: transparent like some white bone one picks up on a moor, with sea water stones on her long frail hands which slide into yours much narrower than one expects like a folded fan. She has pale gemlike eyes; 6k is dressed, on a windy March day, in three decker skirts of red spotted cotton. She half shuts her eyes; coos an odd little laugh, reminding me of the Fishers {VW's cousins]. All is very tapering 6k pointed, the nose running on like a mole. She said I was a great writer, which pleased me. So sensitive to everything in people 6k books she said. She got talking about her mother, blaspheming in the nursery, hysterical, terrible; setting Edith to kill bluebottles. 'But nobody can take a liberty with her' said Edith, who prides herself on Angevin blood. She is a curious product, likable to me:

sensitive, etiolated, affectionate, lonely, having to thread her way (there is something ghostlike 6k angular about her) home to Bayswater to help cook dinner. She said she would like to attach great bags 6k balloons of psychology, people having dinner, ckc, to her poems, but has no knowledge of human nature, only these sudden intense poems—which by the way she has sent me.4 In other ages she would have been a cloistered nun; or an eccentric secluded country old maid. It is the oddity of our time that has set her on the music hall stage. She trips out into the Limelight with all the timidity 6k hauteur of the aristocratic spinster.
On 30 March the Woolfs set out on a month's holiday, travelling via Paris to Cassis, where they again stayed at the Hotel Cendrillon hut spent most of their days with the Bells and Duncan Grant at the Villa Corsica. On 6 April they left Toulon by train for Rome, going on next day to Palermo, where they stayed five days before moving on to Syracuse. On the return journey they spent three nights in Naples and a week in Rome, and came home to Tavistock Square late on 28 April. VW's letters give a spirited and detailed account of their travels; see III VW Letters, nos. IJ41-J.
Sunday 1 May
We came back on Thursday night from Rome; from that other private life which I mean to have for ever now. There is a complete existence in Italy: apart from this. One is nobody in Italy: one has no name, no calling, no background. And, then, not only is there the beauty, but a different relationship. Altogether I dont think I've ever enjoyed one month so much. What a faculty of enjoyment one has! I liked everything. I wish I were not so ignorant of Italian, art, literature 6k so on. However, I cannot now write this out, or go into the great mass of feeling which it composed in me. Nelly was found, at 11.30, when we got back, in bed, with some mysterious affection of the kidney. This was a jar; the coffee was a jar; everything was a jar. And then I remember how my book is coming out. People will say I am irreverent—people will say a thousand things. But

I think, honestly, I care very little this time—even for the opinion of my friends. I am not sure if it is good. I was disappointed when I read it through the first time. Later I liked it. Anyhow it is the best I can do. But would it be a good thing to read my things when they are printed, critically? It is encouraging that, in spite of obscurity, affectation & so on, my sales rise steadily. We have sold, already, 1220 before publication, & I think it will be about 1500, which for a writer like I am is not bad. Yet, to show I am genuine, I find myself thinking of other things with absorption & forgetting that it will be out on Thursday. Leonard never thinks of his book. Vita comes back on Friday. I am angry with Clive for gossiping about my letter to Nessa.1 It is fine, cold, clear, we dine out, have a char.
Thursday 5 May
Book out. We have sold (I think) 1690 before publication—twice Dalloway. I write however in the shadow ofthe damp cloud ofthe Times Lit Sup. review, which is an exact copy of the JsR. Mrs Dalloway review, gentlemanly, kindly, timid & praising beauty, doubting character, & leaving me moderately depressed.2 I am anxious about Time Passes. Think the whole thing may be pronounced soft, shallow, insipid, sentimental. Yet, honestly, don't much care; want to be let alone to ruminate. Odd how strong this feeling is in me. Now I think we are safe to get our motor car. The next fortnight we shall both be depressed about our books.
Dined with the Wests last night, all solid, shiny, spread & spacious; as if they were settling in; wedding presents; clean covers, carpets, &c. all too handsome for my taste.3 I'm reverting to squalor as my milieu. And then why did she marry him? He is the type of any other cleverish young journalist, common, glib: uneasy last night, lest we should talk of Angus. But we talked of Madge.
I know why I am depressed: a bad habit of making up the review I should like before reading the review I get. I am excited about my article

on Poetry & Fiction. Writing for an audience always stirs me. I hope to avoid too many jokes.4 Then Vita will come tomorrow. But I dont want people: I want solitude; Rome.
Nelly away; Pinker [dog] away; Clive coming back; Opera in swing; Francis to see me about writing; fine spring weather.
Wednesday 11 May
Vita back; unchanged, though I daresay one's relation changes from day to day. Clive & she together. I think Clive is pretty miserable: his stay at Cassis a failure, so far as writing goes. And then the question rises, has he not gone too far in eating, drinking, love making, to stop dead now? He seemed random & unsettled, much as when he left, only now with no absolute hard arm to cling to, as he fancied when he went to Cassis. He talked (always shifting away from himself yet returning, ambiguously to that centre) about going mad: sometimes thought he was going mad; then how one's life was over; one was spent, played out; this was clear when one saw Julian & Quentin. After all, its an ignominious position to have made the grand refusal, & gone back on it. Mary was at the opera, on a hot evening like this think of listening to Wagner, he said. There's Saxon upstairs, Mary & Sibyl Colefax below. This was all said half enviously, yet doubtfully; as if not knowing what line to take.
My book. What is the use of saying one is indifferent to reviews when positive praise, though mingled with blame, gives one such a start on, that instead of feeling dried up, one feels, on the contrary, flooded with ideas? I gather from vague hints, through Margery Joad, through Clive, that some people say it is my best book. So far Vita praises; Dotty enthuses; an unknown donkey writes. No one has yet read it to the end, I daresay; & I shall hover about, not anxious but worried for 2 more weeks, when it will be over.
Monday 16 May
The book. Now on its feet so far as praise is concerned. It has been out 10 days—Thursday a week ago. Nessa enthusiastic—a sublime, almost upsetting spectacle. She says it is an amazing portrait of mother; a supreme portrait painter; has lived in it; found the rising ofthe dead almost painful.

Then Ottoline, then Vita, then Charlie [Sanger], then Lord Olivier, then Tommie, then Clive:5 poor Clive—he came in, ostensibly to praise this 'amazing book—far the best you've ever written' but found Eddie who imposed himself resolutely, sharply; & so sat on, but how wandering & unhappy. I have scarcely seen him in this mood ever before—like a person awaked from a sweet dream. But what is it? A disillusionment? A shock? He sees Mary. Has he lost faith? Has the dancing mist of rhapsody failed him—he who was based so solidly on such beef & beer or champagne rather. Suppose one woke & found oneself a fraud? It was part of my madness—that horror. But then as Clive said, you go mad but you bound up again—the inference being that he was to stay mad.
Sold 1802 of The L.: if it makes 3,000 I This it did on July 13 th       shall be as they say more than content. Mervyn
[Arnold-Forster] dead—did I record; & I haunted for a time by the sight of his prim pinched face, with the nice blue eyes, so suddenly stilled: so unseasonably. The eye plays a large part in these affairs.
Monday 6 June {Whit Monday)
I have been in bed a week with a sudden & very sharp headache, & this is written experimentally to test my brain. It is a horrid dull damp Bank holiday morning—(here L. comes in & we spend fifteen minutes discussing advertisements. The L. has sold 2,200 & we are reprinting). Nessa says its ugly weather when I ring up to offer her half a bottle of turpentine to paint her cupboard with.
But I would like to learn to write a steady plain narrative style. Then perhaps I could catch up with the last few weeks; describe my visit to Oxford;16k how I lunched with Clive & dined with Dadie 6k stood in the basement printing Gottstalk with a great sense of shade & shelter. I like the obscure anonymity ofthe Press better a good deal than I like Voltaire

by Riding.2 And now, with Morgan's morganatic, evasive, elusive letter this morning, The Lighthouse is behind me:3 my headache over; & after a week at Rodmell, my freedom from inspection, my deep dive into my own mind will begin.
How odd, it comes into my mind, is Nessa 6k my jealousy of each other's clothes! I feel her, when I put on my smart black fringed cape, anguished for a second: did I get it from Champco? in the same way I run my eye over her Paris dress, 6k compare it with my last year's Brooke.4 Then she says she is going to wear earrings: I say at once that I will; this she resents. Yet, we are both fundamentally sensible, 6k soon recover from our umbrage.
I think, however, I am now almost an established figure—as a writer. They dont laugh at me any longer. Soon they will take me for granted. Possibly I shall be a celebrated writer. Anyhow, The Lighthouse is much more nearly a success, in the usual sense ofthe word, than any other book of mine.
A great knot of people came together suddenly last week, or the week before. Tom—so glad to gossip with me off* handedly over a cup—no 6 cups—of tea; then he played the gramophone: 6k Logan, pink 6k spruce, doing his trick of culture 6k urbanity 6k good sense very efficiently.5 He had been evoking the spirit of Henry James with Desmond in Paris. (Sibyl, by the way, takes to herself all credit for that fund, I observe. Sibyl, Clive 6k Raymond say, has sold her soul to the devil, 6k he's now come to fetch it—This phrase is common to them both, 6k gives the measure of

smart talk at lunch parties.) Lytton, too, I saw: an invalid after an attack of love, the most desperate since Duncan. We talked, with poor marble eyed Cynthia Noble attentive, as far as she can be, about the O'B. & his life.6 I often glide into intimacy with Lytton about books. He is enthusiastic, his mind bare, his attention extremely alive, about books; whereas, about love, its more cryptic. Dadie & Douglas were both starched & powdered like pasteboard young men at the ballet;7 legs quite straight; heads curled; shirts granulated; they were going on to Kitchin's party, to be bored, as they knew; but in perfect trim for it. This Lytton does not quite achieve. We dined ostentatiously rather, it being part ofthe game to order food from Fortnum & Mason's; part ofthe pathetic, rather attractive, yet also foolish, showing off, very youthful game of being precisely like other people.
Saturday 18 June
This is a terribly thin diary for some reason: half the year has been spent, & left only these few sheets. Perhaps I have been writing too hard in the morning to write here also. Three weeks wiped out by headache. We had a week at Rodmell, of which I remember various sights, suddenly unfolding before me spontaneously (for example, the village standing out to sea in the June night, houses seeming ships, the marsh a fiery foam) & the immense comfort of lying there lapped in peace. I lay out all day in the new garden, with the terrace. It is already being made. There were blue tits nested in the hollow neck of my Venus.8 Vita came over one very hot afternoon, & we walked to the river with her. Pinker now swims after

Leonard's stick. I read—any trash. Maurice Baring; sporting memoirs. Slowly ideas began trickling in; & then suddenly I rhapsodised (the night L. dined with the apostles) & told over the story of the Moths, which I think I will write very quickly, perhaps in between chapters of that long impending book on fiction.9 Now the moths will I think fill out the skeleton which I dashed in here: the play-poem idea: the idea of some
continuous stream, not solely of human thought, but The Waves          of the ship, the night &c, all flowing together: intersected
by the arrival of the bright moths. A man & a woman are to be sitting at table talking. Or shall they remain silent? It is to be a love story: she is finally to let the last great moth in. The contrasts might be something of this sort: she might talk, or think, about the age of the earth: the death of humanity: then moths keep on coming. Perhaps the man could be left absolutely dim. France: near the sea; at night; a garden under the window. But it needs ripening. I do a little work on it in the evening when the gramophone is playing late Beethoven sonatas. (The windows fidget at their fastenings as if we were at sea.)
We have been to Hyde Park, where the Church boys were marching; officers on horses in their cloaks like equestrian statues.10 Always this kind of scene gives me the notion of human beings playing a game, greatly, I suppose, to their own satisfaction.
We saw Vita given the Hawthornden.11 A horrid show up, I thought: not ofthe gentry on the platform—Squire, Drinkwater, Binyon only—of us all: all of us chattering writers. My word! how insignificant we all looked! How can we pretend that we are interesting, that our works matter? The whole business of writing became infinitely distasteful. There was no one I could care whether he read, liked, or disliked "my writing". And no one could care for my criticism either: the mildness, the conventionality of them all struck me. But there may be a stream of ink in them that matters more than the look of them—so tightly clothed, mild,

& decorous—showed. I felt there was no one full grown mind among us. In truth, it was the thick dull middle class of letters that met; not the aristocracy. Vita cried at night.
Wednesday 22 June
Woman haters depress me, & both Tolstoi & Mrs Asquith hate women. I suppose my depression is a form of vanity. But then so are all strong opinions on both sides. I hate Mrs A.'s hard, dogmatic empty style. But enough: I shall write about her tomorrow:12 I write every day about something, & have deliberately set apart a few weeks to money making, so that I may put £50 in each of our pockets by September. This will be the first money of my own since I married. I never felt the need of it till lately. And I can get it, if I want it, but shirk writing for money.
Clive's father died yesterday.13 Harold Nicolson & Duncan dined with us, & Nessa came in afterwards, very silent, inscrutable &, perhaps critical. As a family we distrust anyone outside our set, I think. We too definitely decide that so & so has not the necessary virtues. I daresay Harold has not got them; at the same time, there is a good deal in him I like: he is quick & rash & impulsive; not in our sense, very clever; uneasy; seeming young; on the turn from diplomat to intellectual; not Vita's match; but honest & cordial. L. says he's too commonplace. I liked my little duet with him. He wears a green, or blue, shirt & tie; is sunburnt; chubby, pert[?]; vivacious. Talked of politics, but was flimsy compared with Leonard—I thought. Said it was with L. & me that he felt completely at his ease. Told stories wh. sound rather empty in the bare Bloomsbury rooms.
Thursday 23 June
This diary shall batten on the leanness of my social life. Never have I spent so quiet a London summer. It is perfectly easy to slip out of the crush unobserved. I have set up my standard as an invalid, & no one bothers me. No one asks me to do anything. Vainly, I have the feeling that this is of my choice, not theirs; & there is a luxury in being quiet in the heart of chaos. Directly I talk & exert my wits in talk I get a dull damp rather headachy day. Quiet brings me cool clear quick mornings, in which

I dispose ofa good deal of work, & toss my brain into the air when I take a walk. I shall feel some triumph if I skirt a headache this summer.
I sat with Nessa in the Square yesterday. Angelica sends Pinker after a ball. Nessa & I sit on the seat & gossip. She is to see Mary; she is to go to old Bell's funeral. She is learning to motor. She has sold a picture. The point of Clive's affair is that Mary is in love with another. This point was carefully hidden before Easter. His vanity was careful to hide it: her discretion. So I got my version out of proportion. The truth is odd enough though. Unless she will bed with him he is distracted. That she will not do; yet, for lack of him, is distracted herself. The love affair rather increases on her side. It is said to be for someone low in the world. This inclines us to think it Lord Ivor. But the point is one for curiosity only. Vita's book [The Land] verberates & reverberates in the Press. A prize poem—that's my fling at it—for with some relics of jealousy, or it may be of critical sense, I can't quite take the talk of poetry & even great poetry seriously. But the subject & the manner, so smooth, so mild, may be what I dislike; & perhaps I am corrupt. I wonder what I should think if I could get a cool look at some writing of my own.
Oh & Sibyl has dropped me: & I don't feel the fall. What is then the abiding truth in this phantasmagoria, I ask myself, seeking as I often do some little nugget of pure gold. I think, often, I have the happiest of lives, in having discovered stability. Now one stable moment vanquishes chaos. But this I said in The Lighthouse. We have now sold, I think, 2555 copies.
I am distressed by my failure to make cigarettes. I had a lesson from a man in Francis Street—cant do a thing with my fingers. Angelica is expert with hers already. Nessa says all painters are: this is a perquisite they get thrown in with their gift.
And Adrian came to tea on Sunday, & fairly sparkled. At last I think he has emerged. Even his analysis will be over this year. At the age of 43 he will be educated & ready to start life. I remember Harry Stephen saying that he had his fingers on the gear—the Indian judgeship that is to say— about then.14 So we Stephens mature late. And our late flowers are rare & splendid. Think of my books, Nessa's pictures—it takes us an age to bring our faculties into play. And now I must write to Ethel Sands, & perhaps, go to the Ballet.15

Thursday 30 June
Now I must sketch out the Eclipse.16
About 10 on Tuesday night several very long trains, accurately filled (ours with civil servants) left King's Cross. In our carriage was Vita & Haroldf,] Quentin, L. & I. This is Hatfield I daresay, I said. I was smoking a cigar. Then again, This is Peterborough, L. said. Before it got dark we kept looking at the sky: soft fleecy; but there was one star, over Alexandra Park. Look Vita, that's Alexandra Park, said Harold. The Nicolsons got sleepy: H. curled up with his head on V.'s knee. She looked like Sappho by Leighton, asleep; so we plunged through the midlands; made a very long stay at York. Then at 3 we got out our sandwiches, & I came in from the wc to find Harold being rubbed clean of cream. Then he broke the china sandwich box. Here L. laughed without restraint. Then we had another doze, or the N.'s did; then here was a level crossing, at which were drawn up a long line of motor omnibuses & motors, all burning pale yellow lights. It was getting grey—still a fleecy mottled sky. We got to Richmond about 3.30: it was cold, & the N.'s had a quarrel, Eddie said, about V.'s luggage. We went off in the omnibus, saw a vast castle (who does that belong to said Vita, who is interested in Castles). It had a front window added, & a light I think burning. All the fields were aburn with June grasses & red tasselled plants, none coloured as yet, all pale. Pale & grey too were the little uncompromising Yorkshire farms. As we passed one, the farmer, & his wife & sister came out, all tightly & tidily dressed in black, as if they were going to church. At another ugly square farm, two women were looking out of the upper windows. These had white blinds drawn down half across them. We were a train of 3 vast cars, one stopping to let the others go on; all very low & powerful; taking immensely steep hills. The driver once got out & put a small stone behind our wheel—inadequate. An accident would have been natural. There were also many motor cars. These suddenly increased as we crept up to the top of Bardon Fell. Here were people camping beside their cars. We got out, 6k found ourselves very high, on a moor, boggy, heathery, with butts for grouse shooting. There were grass tracks here & there, & people had already taken up positions. So we joined them, walking out to what seemed the highest point looking over Richmond. One light burnt down there. Vales & moors stretched, slope after slope, round us. It was like the Haworth country. But over Richmond, where the sun was rising, was a 16. Special trains were run from London to North Yorkshire, which was within the belt of totality for the total eclipse of the sun on 29 June 1927—the first to be visible in Britain for over 200 years. In London bad weather completely obscured the phenomenon.

soft grey cloud. We could see by a gold spot where the sun was. But it was early yet. We had to wait, stamping to keep warm. Ray [Strachey] had wrapped herself in the blue striped blanket off a double bed. She looked incredibly vast 6k bedroomish. Saxon looked very old. Leonard kept looking at his watch. Four great red setters came leaping over the moor. There were sheep feeding behind us. Vita had tried to buy a guinea pig— Quentin advised a savage17—so she observed the animals from time to time. There were thin places in the cloud, & some complete holes. The question was whether the sun would show through a cloud or through one of these hollow places when the time came. We began to get anxious. We saw rays coming through the bottom of the clouds. Then, for a moment we saw the sun, sweeping—it seemed to be sailing at a great pace & clear in a gap; we had out our smoked glasses; we saw it crescent, burning red; next moment it had sailed fast into the cloud again; only the red streamers came from it; then only a golden haze, such as one has often seen. The moments were passing. We thought we were cheated; we looked at the sheep; they showed no fear; the setters were racing round; everyone was standing in long lines, rather dignified, looking out. I thought how we were like very old people, in the birth of the world—druids on Stonehenge: (this idea came more vividly in the first pale light though;) At the back of us were great blue spaces in the cloud. These were still blue. But now the colour was going out. The clouds were turning pale; a reddish black colour. Down in the valley it was an extraordinary scrumble of red & black; there was the one light burning; all was cloud down there, & very beautiful, so delicately tinted. Nothing could be seen through the cloud. The 24 seconds were passing. Then one looked back again at the blue: & rapidly, very very quickly, all the colours faded; it became darker & darker as at the beginning ofa violent storm; the light sank & sank: we kept saying this is the shadow; & we thought now it is over—this is the shadow when suddenly the light went out. We had fallen. It was extinct. There was no colour. The earth was dead. That was the astonishing moment: & the next when as if a ball had rebounded, the cloud took colour on itself again, only a sparky aetherial colour & so the light came back. I had very strongly the feeling as the light went out of some vast obeisance; some-    The colour for some thing kneeling down, & low 6k suddenly   moments was of the most
.j              l        l        1                       t-1          lovely kind—fresh, various
raised up, when the colours came. They   _he£e bIue> & ^
came back astonishingly lightly 6k quickly   brown: all new colours, as 6k beautifully in the valley 6k over the hills    if washed over 6k repainted.

—at first with a miraculous glittering & aetheriality, later normally almost, but with a great sense of relief. It was like recovery. We had been much worse than we had expected. We had seen the world dead. This was within the power of nature. Our greatness had been apparent too. Now we became Ray in a blanket, Saxon in a cap &c. We were bitterly cold. I should say that the cold had increased as the light went down. One felt very livid. Then—it was over till 1999. What remained was a sense of the comfort which we get used to, of plenty of light & colour. This for some time seemed a definitely welcome thing. Yet when it became established all over the country, one rather missed the sense of its being a relief & a respite, which one had had when it came back after the darkness. How can I express the darkness? It was a sudden plunge, when one did not expect it: being at the mercy of the sky: our own nobility: the druids; Stonehenge; & the racing red dogs; all that was in ones mind. Also, to be picked out of ones London drawing room 6k set down on the wildest moors in England was impressive. For the rest, I remember trying to keep awake in the gardens at York while Eddy talked & falling asleep. Asleep again in the train. It was hot & we were merry. The carriage was full of things. Harold was very kind & attentive: Eddy was peevish. Roast beef & pineapple chunks, he said. We got home at 8.30 perhaps.
Monday 4 July
Back from Long Barn.1 Thank heaven, I never had to change my dress. Such opulence & freedom, flowers all out, butler, silver, dogs, biscuits, wine, hot water, log fires, Italian cabinets, Persian rugs, books—this was the impression it made: as of stepping into a rolling gay sea, with nicely crested waves: as if the anxious worn life had suddenly been set on springs, & went bounding, springing for the week end. Yet I like this room better perhaps: more effort & life in it, to my mind, unless this is the prejudice one has naturally in favour of the display of one's own character. Vita very opulent, in her brown velvet coat with the baggy pockets, pearl necklace, & slightly furred cheeks. (They are like saviours flannel, of which she picked me a great bunch, in texture2) Of its kind this is the best, most representative human life I know: I mean, certain gifts & qualities & good fortunes are here miraculously combined—I liked Harold too.

He is a spontaneous childlike man, of no great boring power; has a mind that bounces when he drops it; he opens his eyes as he looks at one; has a little immature moustache; curled hair; an air of immaturity which is welcome. I should judge him very generous & kind hearted; an Englishman overlaid with culture; coming of a sunburnt country stock; & not much fined even by diplomacy. After dinner last night we discussed the Empire. "I prefer Sydney to Paris. Australia is more important than France. After all, its our younger sons out there. I feel proud of it. The point is, Raymond, our English genius is for government." "The governed don't seem to enjoy it" said Raymond. Silly ass, said Harold. "We do our job: disinterestedly; we dont think of ourselves, as the French do, as the Germans do. Take the British oil fields. There's a hospital there where they take any one, employee or not. The natives come from all over the place. Don't tell me thats not a good thing. And they trust us." So on to the system of bribery; to the great age of England being the age of colonial expansion. "I grant Shakespeare's a nasty snag." "But why not grow, change?" I said. Also, I said, recalling the aeroplanes that had flown over us, while the portable wireless played dance music on the terrace, "can't you see that nationality is over? All divisions are now rubbed out, or about to be." Raymond vehemently assented. Raymond is all for the triumph of mind. What action matters? Actions matter most of all, said Harold. I was sitting on a carved Italian stool over the log fire; he & Raymond bedded in the soft green sofa. Leonard's injustice to the aristocracy was discussed. Before this, Lord Sackville & Mrs Rubens had come over, partly to protect their respectability, partly to play tennis. (They won't stay at Knole alone if possible; & if they must, sanctify the proceeding by calling on Vita). He is a smooth worn man, inheriting noble nose & chin which he has not put much into himself; a straight, young looking man, save that his face has the lack lustre of a weak man whose life has proved too much for him. No longer does he struggle much for happiness, I imagine; accepts resignedly; & goes to Maidstone almost daily, as part ofthe routine ofhis nobility. He plays golf; he plays tennis. He thinks Bernard Darwin must be a man of surpassing brain power.3 We sat together under a vast goat skin coat of Vita's, watching them play, & I found him smooth & ambling as a blood horse, but obliterated, obfusc, with his great Sackville eyes drooping, & his face all clouded with red & brown. One figured a screw or other tool whose worms & edges have been rubbed smooth, so that though they shine, plaid silver, they no longer grip.

Vita very free & easy, always giving me great pleasure to watch, & recalling some image of a ship breasting a sea, nobly, magnificently, with all sails spread, & the gold sunlight on them. As for her poetry, or intelligence, save when canalised in the traditional channels, I can say nothing very certain. She never breaks fresh ground. She picks up what the tide rolls to her feet. For example, she follows, with simple instinct, all the inherited tradition of furnishing, so that her house is gracious, glowing, stately, but without novelty or adventure. So with her poetry, I daresay. Raymond & I travelled up & discussed them. She the most noble character he said; both almost defiantly fortunate, so that Harold touches wood when he reflects on his own life, heaves a sigh & says how, if it were dashed down tomorrow, he would have had his day. But it wont be dashed down at all. It will grow freely & fully round them both; their fruit will ripen, & their leaves golden; & the night will be indigo blue, with a soft gold moon. They lack only what we have—some cutting edge; some invaluable idiosyncracy, intensity, for which I would not have all the sons & all the moons in the world.
Monday 11 July^
Waiting for what I do not exactly know. In a mood of random restlessness—Nelly having for 125 th time 'given notice' this morning. Shall I go to Ashley Gardens [Registry Office] & engage Mrs Collins & her daughter? I am sick of the timid spiteful servant mind; yet perhaps Mrs Collins will be of the same feather. Never mind.
A great storm has torn off'one wing of my double windows. But I have never mentioned the absorbing subject—the subject which has filled our thoughts to the exclusion of Clive & Mary & literature & death & life— motor cars. Every evening we go round with Pinker for a game in Gordon Sqre—I talk as if the evenings had been fine—no, we sit there in between the sulphur coloured storms; under the shelter of trees with the rain pattering between the leaves.5 We talk of nothing but cars. Then, sometimes, word is brought that Mrs Bell is at the door in her car. I rush out, & find her, rather nervously in control of a roomy shabby Renault with Fred beside her. Three times I have been for a little tour with her. And yesterday we commissioned Fred to find us & bring instantly to our door,

a Singer. We have decided on a Singer.6 And, the reason why I am distracted now is that Fred is going to ring me up 6k say if I am to have my first lesson this evening. The sun is shining; the trees dripping. Possibly I may go.
This is a great opening up in our lives. One may go to Bodiam, to Arundel, explore the Chichester downs, expand that curious thing, the map ofthe world in ones mind. It will I think demolish loneliness, & may of course imperil complete privacy. The Keynes' have one too—a cheap one. Nessa thinks it will break down at once. Nessa takes a very sinister view ofthe Keynes'. She anticipates ruin of every sort for them, with some pleasure too. Here's Leonard—So then I tell him about the storm, about the telephones, & about Pinker. Then Sibyl who has cut me these 3 months, suddenly writes to say she has been 'unwell', & will I come to tea. No I wont. And now I must quickly dress for Clive's party, where I am to meet Cory & Nessa & Duncan & Christabel: for there's a plethora of parties this week, & tomorrow I'm missing Lydia & Stravinsky;7 but a kind of philosophy protects me: I shall make out a happy evening somehow; & find a curious pleasure in staying away, imagining. So I must stop & write to Sibyl. With any luck The Lighthouse will reach 3,000 this week. Saturday 23 July
This is very near the end ofthe London season. I go to Ethel [Sand]'s at Dieppe (I'm rather proud of crossing the channel again) on Wednesday, then back to Newhaven, where I may be met by my own car. Since making the last entry I have learnt enough to drive a car in the country alone. On the backs of paper I write down instructions for starting cars. We have a nice light little shut up car in which we can travel thousands of miles. It is very dark blue, with a paler line round it. The world gave me this for writing The Lighthouse, I reflect, a book which has now sold 3,160 (perhaps) copies: will sell 3,500 before it dies, & thus far exceeds any other of mine.
The night I did not go to Stravinsky Desmond came, tender & garrulous & confidential. I remember leaning with him out of the window. He

was full of love for everyone. He said he loved the way Melinda [unidentified] scratched her head or put on her gloves. He said he was now in love with his children. When Dermod asks him for a new perspective for his microscope he feels what he used to feel when he was in love with a woman. He resents his gift of money a little, since he was making £2,000 a year; but then he had 'arrears'; 6k has now, evidently—£200 to the Bank, £200 for income tax & so on. We talked of love owing to Clive. For that night after I dined with Clive & went through some rather artificial gambols with Christabel McLaren] (who has always thought of me as Virginia; & can't quite lose the sense of my being a perfect lady "Look at those hands") Clive walked me round, & standing under the lamp expressed his complete disillusion. "My dear Virginia, life is over. There's no good denying it. We're 45. I'm bored, I'm bored, I'm unspeakably bored. I know my own reactions. I know what I'm going to say. I'm not interested in a thing. Pictures bore me. I take up a book & put it down. No one's interested in what I think any more. I go about thinking about suicide. I admire you for having tried to kill yourself." To think that I should be listening to this in the moonlight from Clive! And he spoke with such dreary good sense too. I could scarcely whip up any ardour of denial. It was all true, it seemed to me. Not, indeed, true of me, but true of him. & so I feebly asked him to come & see me; & I would prove that I was interested in him. He agreed half heartedly, waved his hand, & went off, thinking about suicide. Then we met next night at Raymonds'.8 Hardly had I come into the room but he started up boasting 6k professing, perfunctorily a little, but boldly enough. He had had an adventure. Life was changed; had met the loveliest of women, seemed the nicest too, was an aristocrat; she had been kind to him; would Raymond come on to supper on Monday? All this was blustered out, with many a cuff at me (for he always wishes he says to hurt me—even over a motor car) & it was about Valerie Taylor, an actress, whom he had met lunching at the Maclagans.9 For my own part, I am once more at the stage of thinking Clive 'second rate'. It is all so silly, shallow, & selfish. Granted the charm of his vitality, still one would prefer a finer taste to it. How angry his 'secondrateness' used to make me, in connection with Nessa.

Now I think of it much less often, but I suppose the feeling is there. All this summer he has twanged so persistently on the one string that one gets bored. Love love love—Clive, Clive, Clive—that's the tune of it, thrummed with rather callous persistency; a thick finger & thumb. Now love I dare say nothing against; but it is a feeble passion, I mean a gross dull passion, when it has no part in it of imagination, intellect, poetry. Clive's love is three parts vanity. Now that he can say, or lie, I've been to bed with Valerie, his self love is assuaged. He remains Clive the undaunted lover, the Don Juan of Bloomsbury; 6k whether its true or not, so long as we think it true, scarcely matters. But I own that he pesters me with his jealousy, or whatever it is, does his best to annoy me, 6k so I'm not quite the impartial judge I might be. The interesting question remains—why does he always wish to hurt me?
So Desmond 6k I discussed all this. And The Lighthouse too; 6k I felt, susceptible as I am, he's doing this partly to thank me for having been generous to him. But I am enough mistress of myself now to let these feelings flow 6k not disturb my pleasure.
All images are now tinged with driving a motor. Here I think of letting my engine work, with my clutch out.
It has been, on the whole, a fresh well ordered summer. I am not so parched with talk as usual. I have dipped into society more easily. My illness in May was a good thing in some ways; for I got control of society at an early stage, 6k circumvented my headache, without a complete smash. Thus it has been a free quiet summer: I enjoyed the Eclipse; I enjoyed Long Barn; (where I went twice) I enjoyed sitting with Vita at Kew for 3 or 4 hours under a cloudy sky, 6k dining at the Petit Riche with her;10 she refreshes me, 6k solaces me; I have worked very methodically 6k done my due of articles, so that with luck, I shall have made £120 over my proper sum by September. That is I shall have made £320 by journalism, 6k I suppose at least £300 by my novel this year. I have thought too much, though on purpose, with my eyes open, of making money; 6k once we have each a nest egg I should like to let that sink into my sub-consciousness, 6k earn easily what we need. Bruce Richmond is coming to tea on Monday to discuss an article on Morgan; 6k I am going to convey to him the fact that I can't always refuse £60 in America for the Times' £10. If I could make easily £350 a year, I would: if I could get some settled job.
At Rodmell I am going, seriously, to begin my book on fiction. With

luck I might have this done by January. Then I shall have the Moths full in my brain to pour out. I am keeping it standing a long time, & rather fear that it may lose its freshness. Dadie has involved us (is the word wrong?) with Peter. Dadie dines with Topsy & she pumps him about the Wolves & Peter's book.11 Dadie wants to crab it & puts it on to us. Leonard says it doesn't do; Virginia thinks it 'Academic'. The result is a long angry letter from Peter, half vanity, half righteous indignation; but we have explained, & all the burden now rests on Dadie. (& partly on me, for Topsy says I wrote her a rude letter about Jane Austen, but this has been explained).
The Press is going on. Novels are the great bloodsuckers. Mary's book will cost us £100; & we shall lose too on The Marionettes. So in the past two days I have rejected Butts & Daglish & Littell; I fancy that we don't do as well as we should with novels.12 And I'm exposed to the hanging lips & clamorous vanity of Lucy Clifford today: she has an article on George Eliot which she wrote for a special fee (that is where I shall end if I dont take care—talking always of 'fees') for the Nineteenth Century.13 Gottstalk is finished.
On 27 July LW saw VW off at Victoria on the boat train for Dieppe, when she went to stay with Ethel Sands and Nan Hudson at their Normandy home, the Chateau dAuppegard; she returned via Newhaven on 30 July, rejoining LW at Monks House.
Rodmell
Monday 8 August
I was to have written here such a brilliant account of my 3 days at Dieppe. It was to have sprung, suddenly, in a beautiful fountain, out of the table in the window at (name forgotten) overlooking the Seine. The

Seine there is very broad, & round the bend come constantly steamers, Norwegian, with petrol, English French; & Nan kept looking to read their names, showing in all she did a sort of nervous tremulous pride in France (or do I imagine this?) which hints at the fact that she likes their life there, alone at Auppegard, better than Ethel.1 "I'm gregarious" said Ethel a little waspishly, for she is brittle & acid, the spoilt pet ofthe more dour & upstanding Nan. We were, I think, looking over the cliff with the churchyard on it, the tombstones standing up against the blue sea. But I was to have written this, & now shall not, I suppose.— It is a very narrow house, all window, laid with pale bright Samarcand rugs, & painted greens & blues, with lovely 'pieces', & great pots of carefully designed flowers arranged by Loomas. A white bull terrier stalks from room to room, one ear bent over in his fights. Nan, stylishly dressed, sews dusters of an evening, & Ethel craves talk. Nessa & Duncan say that the talk skirts & flits & never settles very long; in fact that the house is built upon the finest silver wood ash: so soft so silver you don't at first notice how it gets into your throat & makes your skin dry & dusty.
We have motored most days. We opened one little window when we bought the gramophone; now another/ opens with the motor—I was going to say, but stopped.
Wednesday 10 August*
Yes, the motor is turning out the joy of our lives, an additional life, free & mobile & airy to live alongside our usual stationary industry. We spin off to Falmer, ride over the Downs, drop into Rottingdean, then sweep over to Seaford, call, in pouring rain at Charleston, pass the time of day with Clive—Nessa is at Bodiam—return for tea, all as light & easy as a hawk in the air. Soon we shall look back at our pre-motor days as we do now at our days in the caves. After a week here, Leonard has become perfectly efficient; I am held back by insufficient lessons, but shall be expert before September is half through. Various little improvements in the house keep me on the thrill with hope & despair. Shall I lavish £5 that will be mine on a new spare bed?—alas, I fear I must; then the great & distasteful operations of furnishing will be over, & next year I shall add ornament & comfort. Perhaps if I make an extra sum we might build a

bed sitting room for me in the attic, enlarge L.'s study, & so have a desirable, roomy, light house. For if we had £300 every year to spend, it is difficult to think of anything, except this, travel, & pocket money, to spend it on. Here at the age of 45 are Nessa & I growing little wings again after our lean years. She may rake in another £500; perhaps more.3 Already she has bought a roll of linoleum & a cupboard. But my state is precarious. With The Lighthouse I may just have climbed to the top of my hill; or again we may wobble back; my journalism may pall on the Americans: no rich father in law will endow me; but Heaven knows, I have not much anxiety. We are flexible, adventurous still I hope.
An odd incident, psychologically as the vanished Kot used to say, has been Morgan's serious concern about my article on him. Did I care a straw what he said about me? Was it more laudatory? Yet here is this self-possessed, aloof man taking every word to heart, cast down to the depths, apparently, because I do not give him superlative rank, 6k writing again & again to ask about it, or suggest about it, anxious that it shall be published in England, & also that more space shall be given to the Passage to India. Had I been asked, I should have said that of all writers he would be the most indifferent & cool under criticism. And he minds a dozen times more than I do, who have the opposite reputation.4
This brings me back to those last days in London when I called on Ottoline, had a shabby easy intimate talk with her, & then, inadvertently as if by touching a button brought on me the whole shower bath of Philip's affection. He came the next day, inconveniently, & the day after when Sibyl was there. Once more I felt the uneasy excitement of 'love', that is of physical desire making someone restless, too restless & emotional to talk simply. But L. came in; Pinker came in, & the amorous Philip, who has lost most of his good looks & is coarse as an old ram, had to leave. But I found a letter at Rodmell, quoting J.'s Room—'Come back to me Darling'—with which I shall make Vita jealous tomorrow. But what course to take, especially now that he is our neighbour, I do not altogether know; nor whether to answer his letter or not.5

This, however, is Nelly's first evening back, in the flush of good temper, with Gladys [a niece?], & I am beginning to think of my dinner. Since I dined at Auppegard I cannot be said to have dined at all: ham & eggs; cheese 6k raspberries; once a baked pudding—so we have fed at the hands of poor emaciated Mrs Bartholomew.
Sunday 21 August
Some little scenes I meant to write down.
One was on the flats towards Ripe one blazing hot day. We stopped in a bye road about 3 in the afternoon, 6k heard hymn singing. It was very lonely 6k desolate. Here were people singing to themselves, in the hot afternoon. I looked 6k saw a middle class 'lady' in skirt 6k coat 6k ribboned hat, by the cottage door. She was making the daughters ofthe agricultural labourers sing; it was about three o'clock on a Tuesday perhaps. Later we passed the ladies house; it had a wooden griffin nailed above the door— presumably her crest.
What I like, or one of the things I like, about motoring is the sense it gives one of lighting accidentally, like a voyager who touches another planet with the tip of his toe, upon scenes which would have gone on, have always gone on, will go on, unrecorded, save for this chance glimpse. Then it seems to me I am allowed to see the heart ofthe world uncovered for a moment. It strikes me that the hymn singing in the flats went on precisely so in Cromwell's time.
That was our only hot day, I think. One day the rain splashed down so fast that it rose again in a fountain, up off the road in our faces.
Sunday 4 September
Many scenes have come 6k gone unwritten, since it is today the 4th Sept, a cold grey blowy day, made memorable by the sight ofa kingfisher, 6k by my sense, waking early, of being again visited by 'the spirit of delight'. "Rarely rarely comest thou, spirit of delight."1 That was I singing this time last year; 6k sang so poignantly that I have never forgotten it, or my vision ofa fin rising on a wide blank sea. No biographer could possibly guess this important fact about my life in the late summer of 1926: yet biographers pretend they know people.
A happy summer, this? Well, a striving working splashing social
that after all these years of silence I had really begun to talk to you, almost to be friends—yes; I think you are really very different from the writer of the books, but always adorable.' 
summer. Many meetings; & one or two gaieties.2 I amuse myself by watching my mind shape scenes. We sat in a field strewn with cut grass at Michelham Priory the other day. It was roasting hot. There was Angus with his pink shirt open; Duncan strolling along with a sketchbook under his arm; the sound of rushing waters; Nessa driving her old blue bonnet with Angelica perched beside her. Nothing much is said on these occasions; but the memory remains: made of what? Of coloured shirts; the pink roof of the Gateway against a greyblue sky; & Pinker; & my being cross about my book on fiction; & Leonard silent; & a great quarrel that hot night; & I coming up here to sit alone in the dark, & L. following me; & sharp hard words; right & wrong on both sides; peace making; sleep; content.
A graveyard scene.
Mr Malthouse's son, a sailor, died of consumption & was buried in the churchyard under the big tree. I went into the churchyard with Angelica that fine afternoon. Avery was digging the grave, throwing up heavy showers of the yellow earth. Mrs Avery, immensely fat & florid, was sprawling on the edge ofthe grave, with her small children playing about. They were having tea, & dressed in their reds & blue looked more like a picture, by Millais, or some other Victorian, of life & death, youth & the grave, than any real sight. It was quite unconscious; yet the most deliberate picture making; hence, unreal, sentimental, overdone.3
The Flying Princess, I forget her name, has been drowned in her purple leather breeches.4 I suppose so at least. Their petrol gave out about

midnight on Thursday, when the aeroplane must have come gently down upon the long slow Atlantic waves. I suppose they burnt a light which showed streaky on the water for a time. There they rested a moment or two. The pilots, I think, looked back at the broad cheeked desperate eyed vulgar princess in her purple breeches & I suppose made some desperate dry statement—how the game was up: sorry; fortune against them; & she just glared; & then a wave broke over the wing; & the machine tipped. And she said something theatrical I daresay; nobody was sincere; all acted a part; nobody shrieked; Luck against us—something of that kind, they said, & then So long, 6k first one man was washed off & went under; & then a great wave came & the Princess threw up her arms & went down; & the third man sat saved for a second looking at the rolling waves, so patient so implacable & the moon gravely regarding; & then with a dry snorting sound he too was tumbled off & rolled over, & the aeroplane rocked & rolled—miles from anywhere, off Newfoundland, while I slept at Rodmell, & Leonard was dining with the Craniums in London.5
Monday 5 September
Having solidified the vision of the flying Princess into words, I have, strangely enough, laid a phantom which has been very prominent before my eyes. Why should this be so? Some dissatisfaction seems laid to rest. So, gradually, the urgency of the memory dies out too, as in one's own life; in about 48 or 96 hours all trace of the death of the Princess in her purple breeches is smoothed over.
As a matter of fact, we are just in from Brighton, & my mind is agitated by having bought a jersey, which I like; & by having let Leonard bump the back ofthe car on the gate post. So, to soothe these whirlpools, I write here. We went to Brighton today; & thus added a pounds worth of pleasure to life. Monotony is avoided. Oh, & I thought—but the thought is already escaping—about the enormous activity of the human kind; his feverish runnings about; Brighton & the roads being nothing but a swarm & agitation of human flesh; & yet it is not despicable.
And when I get back here, the same energy is bringing the men back from harvest across the fields; & old Mr Grey, & the poor plodding horse [?]. Now a really comprehensive magnificent statesmanlike mind would take stock of all this human activity & direct it & weld it together. I see this possibility by fits & starts: I see human beings as at the beginning of a vast enterprise, not merely with the usual writers care for the aesthetic

quality. This is a point of view which is more & more forced upon one by places like Peacehaven. All aesthetic quality is there destroyed. Only turning & tumbling energy is left. The mind is like a dog going round & round to make itself a bed. So, give me new & detestable ideas, I will somehow trample a bed out of them.
Tuesday 20 September6
A thousand things to be written had I time: had I power. A very little writing uses up my capacity for writing:
Laughton Place & Philip Ritchie's death
These as it happened, synchronised. When Vita was here io days ago we drove over to Laughton, & I broke in, & explored the house. It seemed, that sunny morning, so beautiful, so peaceful; 6k as if it had endless old rooms. So I came home boiling with the idea of buying it; 6k so fired L. that we wrote to the farmer, Mr Russell, & waited, all on wires, edgy, excited for an answer. He came himself, after some days; & we were to go & see it. This arranged, & our hopes very high, I opened the Morning Post & read the death of Philip Ritchie.7 "He cant take houses, poor Philip" I thought. And then the usual procession of images went through my mind. Also, I think for the first time, I felt this death leaves me an elderly laggard; makes me feel I have no right to go on; as if my life were at the expense ofhis. And I had not been kind; not asked him to dinner & so on. So the two feelings—about buying the house & his death—fought each other: & sometimes the house won 6k sometimes death won; & we went to see the house & it turned out unspeakably dreary; all patched 6k spoilt; with grained oak 6k grey paper; a sodden garden 6k a glaring red cottage at the back. I note the strength 6k vividness of feelings which suddenly break 6k foam away. Now I forget to think about Philip Ritchie.
One of these days, though, I shall sketch here, like a grand historical


picture, the outlines of all my friends. I was thinking of this in bed last night, 6k for some reason I thought I would begin with a sketch of Gerald Brenan. There may be something in this idea. It might be a way of writing the memoirs of one's own times during peoples lifetimes. It might be a most amusing book. The question is how to do it. Vita should be Orlando, a young nobleman. There should be Lytton. 6k it should be truthful; but fantastic. Roger. Duncan. Clive. Adrian. Their lives should be related. But I can think of more books than I shall ever be able to write. How many little stories come into my head! For instance: Ethel Sands not looking at her letters. What this implies. One might write a book of short significant separate scenes. She did not open her letters.
We motored to Long Barn 6k back yesterday, through suburbs for the most part. All Hampstead, red, sanitary, earnest, view gazing, breeze requiring is lodged in the heights of Ashdown Forest. Now 6k again one comes on something consciously preserved like the Wren house at Groombridge.8 One stops the motor 6k looks. So do other motorists. We found Vita 6k Dotty sitting over a log fire. Dottie is going to spend £200 a year on poetry: to edit a series of books of unsaleable poetry. This £200 she was giving to the Poetry Bookshop, but deterred by his earnestness 6k his drunkenness she is crying off: 6k has laid it at our feet.9 There will be much comment she says at this. People will say she is buying her way into Bloomsbury. The children were there; Nigel very shabby: Vita dressed him as a Russian boy "Dont. It makes me look like a little girl" he said. There was the French tutor who never spoke.10 Dotty byronic in her dress, but much improved over the London Dotty. They do not yet know what is to become of Harold, who has refused to go to Buda Pesth.
And Quentin came, 6k the Keynes's came, 6k Morgan came. All of this I meant, perhaps, to describe: but then how hard I drive my pen through

one article after another—Hemingway, Morgan, Shelley; & now Biography.11
Quentin wont let us play him Wagner: prefers Bach. Nessa's children are terrifyingly sophisticated: so Morgan said when Angelica, rigged up in a long black shawl, acted Lady Cornflax 6k Lady Ottoline at Charleston. They have grown up without any opposition: nothing to twist or stunt. Hence they have reached stages at 16 or 17 which I reached only at 26 or 27.
But the summer, has never burnt; & is now ashes. Already at half past five the light out here is greyish; the wind swirling; all children indoors; 6k I shall write a letter or two 6k go into the house: sit over a fire 6k read, I think, biography.
But we are very happy—seldom more so, I think. Perhaps things are doing rather well. Theres the motor; Dottie's £200;—6k L. said about Laughton Place the other day, "The strange thing is that we always come to the same opinion about things"—which pleased me.
Sunday 25 September
On the opposite page I wrote notes for Shelley, I think by mistake for my writing book.12
Now let me become the annalist of Rodmell.
Thirty five years ago, there were 160 families living here where there are now no more than 80. It is a decaying village, which loses its boys to the towns. Not a boy of them, said the Rev. Mr Hawkesford, is being taught to plough. Rich people wanting week end cottages buy up the old peasants houses, for fabulous sums. Monks House was offered to Mr H. for £400: we gave £700. He refused it, saying he didn't wish to own country cottages. Now Mr Allinson will pay £1200 for a couple, 6k we he said might get £2,000 for this.13

He is an old decaying man, run to seed. His cynicism, 6k the pleasant turn it gives his simple worn out sayings, amuses me. He is sinking into old age, very shabby, loose limbed, wearing black wool mittens. His life is receding like a tide, slowly; or one figures him as a dying candle, whose wick will soon sink into the warm grease 6k be extinct. To look at, he is like some aged bird; a little, small featured face, with heavily lidded smoky bright eyes; his complexion is still ruddy; but his beard is like an unweeded garden. Little hairs grow weakly all over his cheeks, 6k two strands are drawn, like pencil marks, across his bald head. He tumbles into an armchair; 6k tells over his stock of old village stories, which always have this slightly mocking flavour, as though, completely unambitious, 6k by no means successful himself, he recouped himself by laughing slyly at the humours ofthe more energetic. He has a hit at Allinson for building; drily tells us how Capt Stamper won't pay his tithes; how Miss Lucas signs the Captain's cheques for him.14 The outlay these flashy newcomers make on their field 6k farms makes him sardonic. But he wont raise a finger either way; likes his cup of Indian tea, which he prefers to China, 6k doesn't much mind what anybody thinks. He smokes endless cigarettes, 6k his fingers are not very clean. Talking of his well, he said "It would be a different thing if one wanted baths"—which for some 70 years, presumably, he has done without. Then he likes a little practical talk about Aladdin lamps, for instance, 6k how the Rector at Iford has a device by which he makes the globe of the Veritas lamp wh. is cheaper serve. It appears that the Aladdin costs 10d 6k 2/-. But it blackens suddenly 6k is useless. Leaning over stiles, it is of lamp mantles that the two rectors talk.15 Or he will advise about making a garage: how Percy shd. cut a trench, 6k then old Fears should line the walls with cement. That is what he advises; 6k I fancy many many hours of his life have passed hobnobbing with Percys 6k Fears, about cement 6k trenches. Of his clerical character there is little visible. He would not buy Bowen a riding school he said; her sister did that. He didn't believe in it. She has a school at Rottingdean, keeps 12 horses, employs grooms, 6k has to be at it all day, Sundays

included.16 But having expressed his opinion in the family conclave, he would leave it at that. Mrs H. would back Bowen. She would get her way. The Rector would slouch off to his study, where he does, heaven knows what. I asked him if he had work to do: a question which amused him a little. Not work he said; but a young woman to see. And then he settled into the armchair again, & so sat out a visit of over an hour & a half.
Wednesday 5 October
I write in the sordid doss house atmosphere of approaching departure. Pinker is asleep in one chair; Leonard is signing cheques at the little deal table under the glare of the lamp. The fire is covered with ashes, since we have been burning it all day, & Mrs Bartholomew], never cleans. Envelopes lie in the grate. I am writing with a pen which is feeble & wispy; & it is a sharp fine evening with a sunset, I daresay.
We went to Amberley yesterday & think of buying a house there. For it is an astonishing forgotten lovely place, between water meadows & downs. So impulsive we both are, in spite of our years.
But we are not as old as Mrs Gray, who came to thank us for our apples. She won't send to buy, as it looks like begging, since we never take
1832    money. Her face is cut into by wrinkles: they make wheals across
her. She is 86, & can never remember such a summer. In her youth
1918    it was so hot in April often that they couldn't bear a sheet on
them. Her youth must have been almost the same time as my
fathers. She is 9 years younger, I make out: born in 1841. And what did
she see of Victorian England I wonder?1
I can make up situations, but I cannot make up plots. That is: if I pass the lame girl, I can without knowing I do it, instantly make up a scene: (now I cant think of one). This is the germ of such fictitious gift as I have. And by the way I get letter after letter about my books, & they scarcely please me.
Further, we met Mary & Barbara [Hutchinson] in Brighton yesterday; grey, tailor made, elegant, with a touch of pink, & pink silk legs. Yet I fancied some wrinkles about Mary's eyes; & a sharp line or two, made by Clive. We were affable, as people are when they meet after a coolness; we gave them buns. We were extra affable, perhaps; & the shadow of Clive

loomed above us. Going to fetch L.'s hat from Charleston I chanced on one of those evening autumn emotional hours when people want to be intimate, perhaps to boast. And he told me an absurd romantic story—of a girl, lovely, desired, half his age; & how she loved him, & he could not believe it; she must think me a cultivated elderly man, he said; & so "I try I try to control myself" but, wondrously, they went off the other day; had 4 days perfect bliss; & now "the drama begins". That is, it began two days ago, on Monday. Nobody has the least idea who she is. And is it lasting, or genuine, or only a set off against Mary? & will it survive Mary's attacks, & shall we be dragged in, & so on & so on? Those are the thoughts which agitate us this October, which is the birth of the year.
If my pen allowed, I should now try to make out a work table, having done my last article for the Tribune, & now being free again. And instantly the usual exciting devices enter my mind: a biography beginning in the year 1500 & continuing to the present day, called Orlando: Vita; only with a change about from one sex to another. I think, for a treat, I shall let myself dash this in for a week, while                         [text ends]
The Woolfs returned to London on Thursday 6 October.
Saturday 22 October
This is a book, I think I have said before, which I write after tea. And my brain was full of ideas, but I have spent them on Mr Ashcroft & Miss Findlater, fervent admirers.2
"I shall let myself dash this in for a week"—I have done nothing, nothing, nothing else for a fortnight; & am launched somewhat furtively but with all the more passion upon Orlando: A Biography. It is to be a small book, & written by Christmas. I thought I could combine it with Fiction, but once the mind gets hot it cant stop; I walk making up phrases; sit, contriving scenes; am in short in the thick of the greatest rapture known to me; from which I have kept myself since last February, or earlier. Talk of planning a book, or waiting for an idea! This one came in a rush; I said to pacify myself, being bored & stale with criticism & faced with that intolerable dull Fiction, "You shall write a page ofa story for a treat: you shall stop sharp at 11.30 & then go on with the Romantics". I had very little idea what the story was to be about. But the relief of

turning my mind that way about was such that I felt happier than for months; as if put in the sun, or laid on cushions; & after two days entirely gave up my time chart & abandoned myself to the pure delight of this farce: which I enjoy as much as I've ever enjoyed anything; & have written myself into half a headache & had to come to a halt, like a tired horse, & take a little sleeping draught last night: which made our breakfast fiery. I did not finish my egg. I am writing Orlando half in a mock style very clear & plain, so that people will understand every word. But the balance between truth & fantasy must be careful. It is based on Vita, Violet Trefusis, Lord Lascelles, Knole &c.3
A great many incidents to record. They come always in a rush together, these bright October days, with every one just back, fresh from solitude, cheerful, busy, sociable. Nessa has initiated, informally, Sunday evenings; & there Old Bloomsbury is to gather, after dinner—Helen Clive Roger & so on.
Then I asked the time in the Press a week ago.
"Leonard can tell you" said Angus very huffily.
"Ask Angus. I dont seem to know" said Leonard very grumpy. And I saw Mrs C. lower her head over her typing & laugh. This was the tail of a terrific quarrel about the time between them. Angus was dismissed; but tells Nessa he wants to stay, could tempers be made compatible. A bad year, this, financially, for the Press: yet prospects seem flourishing, if only Marys & Braithwaites didn't eat up all profits. Dottie (who comes to tea with great simplicity, but sits a little long afterwards) is investing her £200 a year in Stella Gibbons &c. & lends me her own poems, which I promptly throw down the W.C.4 Vita stalks into the press, all red & black (so is Orlando) says Lizzie [a dog?] has been shot by a farmer, no, a publican (she respects farmers, not publicans): comes up here with me, & Harold drops in to say Good bye. We sit very cosy & intimate for all

his man about the worldiness, over the gas: he has just been to the Foreign Office & they have been "ever so good. Really they spoil one" he said, being devoted to the Office, which now sends him to Berlin for 3 years.5 Vita will only go for a short time she says. She likes him. She pets him: wants me to make him a fresh cup of tea.
Then there's Clive. He has laid his stairs with the vividest green, 5 inches thick: has every comfort & convenience. I dine there to meet Harold & Tom: Tom, of course, in white waistcoat, much the man of the world; which sets the key, & off they go telling stories about 'Jean' (Cocteau) about Ada Leverson, Gosse, Valery, &c. &c. & L. & I feel a little Bloomsburyish perhaps; no, I think this sort of talk is hardly up to the scratch. Harold does it best. He was in Petersburg when they blew up Stolypin, or his children; can describe the boom bum bum of a bomb falling from the life: 6k the Empress with her yellow eye whites; & King George throwing Mr Britling with a violence to the floor. & I 'may be lacking in distinction but I'm damned if I'm an alien' was his comment on some phrase of Wells'.6
And that reminds me how we saw the pale dove grey coffin of Mrs Wells slide through the gates at Golders Green. It had tassels like bell pulls on it. Wells sat in bottle blue overcoat by [George Bernard] Shaw, sobbing. One saw his white handkerchief going in & out of his pocket. Mr Page a shaggy shabby old scholar, read some typewritten sheets, by Wells, about "our friend Caroline."7 "Poor things, poor silly things" she'd say,

in their days of ill repute. This colloquialism merged in the burial service; & somehow the whole effect was a little nondescript. The aim was to emphasise life; & generosity & how generous lives continue; one thing touched me. "Some are set on a headland & their lives are a beacon to mankind. Others live retired & are hardly known; but their lives are the most precious" which reminds me of what my father wrote, & meant at the moment, of my mother.8 Then the coffin slid away "into the furnace of material creation". She had become part of the roses she loved, & of the sun on snow. Poor Jane! It was desperate to see what a dowdy shabby imperfect lot we looked; how feeble; how ugly for the most part. And yet we were doing our best to say something sincere about our great adventure (as Wells almost called it). And he has been adventurous & plunged about in his bath & splashed the waters, to give him his due. Afterwards we stood about congratulating; Lydia sobbed; Shaw said "You mustnt cry. Jane is well—Jane is splendid" & we went off—I to Fortnum & Mason's to buy shoes.
Sunday 20 November
I will now snatch a moment from what Morgan calls 'life' to enter a hurried note. My notes have been few; life a cascade, a glissade, a torrent: all together. I think on the whole this is our happiest autumn. So much work; 6k success now; & life on easy terms: heaven knows what. My morning rushes, pell mell, from 10 to 1. I write so quick I can't get it typed before lunch. This I suppose is the main backbone of my autumn— Orlando. Never do I feel this, except for a morning or two, writing criticism. Today I began the third chapter. Do I learn anything? Too much of a joke perhaps for that; yet I like these plain sentences; & the externality of it for a change. It is too thin of course; splashed over the canvas; but I shall cover the ground by Jan. 7th (I say) 6k then re-write.
Vita comes; Dottie comes; Clive incessant; Tom; Roger; we have our Bloomsbury evenings; for the first time I have been spending money, on a bed, on a coat (the coat, at the moment, I regret) & had a delicious sense of affluence the other day when at Long Barn I tipped Loune [the butler] 5/- for a nights lodging. But the money psychology is odd; & that it doesn't give me enormous pleasure to spend. I doubt that I want anything

eno'; yet worry about spending wrongly; & must buy an evening dress which worries me too. I have refused Sibyl; accepted Ethel. Fame increases; I think. Young men write about me in their absurd random books. Domestic life, Nelly that is, good as gold.
This is a summary; for I have too many letters to write, & cant catch that cloud which was so heavy in my brain when I sat down.
I made Vita cry the other night; quietly, unself-consciously. "I hate being bored" I said, of her Campbells & Valery Taylors; & this she thought meant I should be tired of her.1
Wednesday 30 November
I have just been upstairs & tried on a hat (18/11) which I have just bought at B&H (so they call it) [Bourne & Hollingsworth, Oxford Street] to wear at Sibyl's lunch party tomorrow. With that money I could have bought a nightgown. Then I heard a man in a bus talk about quality & state of gentlemaness; & you would call me Sir; as I you Madam. This to a working woman, dowdy pasty plush with a baby. "Had more'n 8" she said to the conductor; whom she called young man; & he called her Ma. This is Dickens; or Shakespeare; or simple English cockney: whichever it is I adore it; 6k warm the cockles of my heart at it.
A very happy autumn this, I repeat. Nelly raised £5, & for that reason or another in constant spirits & kindness. Offered last night to clear away. She thinks it only fair, as we've raised her. No trouble about people coming. After Xmas discontent will set in no doubt; when I must write criticism; the light languishes; Nessa Vita Clive are all away. But I will steal a march on that depression. Moreover, aren't I proud at the moment. Ruth Draper admires me: I am to meet her on Friday at Elena Richmond's. What an incredible concatenation! So tonight I go to the Pit to see Ruth Draper.2 Lunch with Sibyl; dine with Ethel; 6k a new dress, made from one ioo years old. These are the little waves that life makes; which keep us tossing 6k going up 6k down on top of them.

[Thursday 1 December]
A rapid note about the lunch party, L. dining at the Cranium.1 An art of light talk; about people. Bogey Harris; Maurice Baring. B.H. 'knows' everyone: that is no one. Freddy Fossle? Oh yes I know him; knows Ly So & So; knows everyone: cant admit to not knowing. A polished, burnished diner out. Roman Catholic. In the middle M. Baring says—But Lady Beaverbrook died this morning.2 Sibyl says Say that again. But BM. [?] was lunching with her yesterday, says Bogey. Well its in the papers: she's dead says M.B. Sibyl says But she was quite young. Lord Ivor asked me to meet the young man her daughter's to marry. I know Lord Ivor says, or wd say Bogey. Well its odd, says Sibyl, giving up the attempt to wrestle with the death of the young at a lunch party. So on to wigs: Lady Charlie used to have hers curled by a sailor on deck before she got up says Bogey. Oh I've known her all my life. Went yatchting with them. Lady . . . eyebrows fell into the soup. Sir John Cook was so fat they had to hike him up. Once he got out of bed in the middle of the night & fell on the floor where he lay 5 hours—couldn't move. BM. sent me a pear by the waiter with a long letter. Talk of houses & periods. All very smooth & surface talk: depends on knowing people: not on saying anything interesting. Bogey's cheeks are polished daily.
Tuesday zo December
This is almost the shortest day & perhaps the coldest night of the year. We are in the black heart of a terrific frost. I notice that look of black atoms in a clear air, which for some reason I can never describe to my liking. The pavement was white with great powdery flakes the other night, walking back with Roger & Helen; this was from Nessa's last Sunday—last, I fear, for many a month. But I have as usual 'no time': let me count the things I should be doing this deep winters night with Leonard at his last lecture, & Pinker asleep in his chair. I should be reading Bagenal's story; Julian's play; Lord Chesterfield's letters; &

writing to Hubert [Henderson] (about a cheque from the Nation).3 There is an irrational scale of values in my mind which puts these duties higher than mere scribbling.
Angus is finally to go: we had another semi-painful interview in the Studio; when he interrupted L.'s dismissal with his own resignation. Not enough money. We think of Francis Birrell as partner; shall ask him tomorrow; & broach the Hogarth Miscellany.4
This flashed to my mind at Nessa's children's party last night. The little creatures acting moved my infinitely sentimental throat. Angelica so mature, & composed; all grey & silver; such an epitome of all womanliness; & such an unopened bud of sense & sensibility; wearing a grey wig & a sea coloured dress. And yet oddly enough I scarcely want children of my own now. This insatiable desire to write something before I die, this ravaging sense of the shortness & feverishness of life, make me cling, like a man on a rock, to my one anchor. I don't like the physicalness of having children of one's own. This occurred to me at Rodmell; but I never wrote it down. I can dramatise myself as parent, it is true. And perhaps I have killed the feeling instinctively; as perhaps nature does.
I am still writing the 3rd Chap, of Orlando. I have had of course to give up the fancy of finishing by February & printing this spring. It is drawing out longer than I meant. I have just been thinking over the scene when O. meets a girl (Nell) in the Park & goes with her to a neat room in Gerrard Street. There she will disclose herself. They will talk. This will lead to a diversion or two about women's love. This will bring in O.'s night life; & her clients (thats the word). Then she will see Dr Johnson, & perhaps write (I want somehow to quote it) To all you Ladies.5 So I shall get some effect of years passing; & then there will be a description of the lights ofthe 18th Century burning; & the clouds ofthe 19th Century rising. Then on to the 19th. But I have not considered this. I want to write it all over hastily, & so keep unity of tone, which in this book is

very important. It has to be half laughing, half serious: with great splashes of exaggeration.
Perhaps I shall pluck up courage to ask the Times for a rise. But could I write for my Annual I would never write for another paper. How extraordinarily unwilled by me but potent in its own right by the way Orlando was! as if it shoved everything aside to come into existence. Yet I see looking back just now to March that it is almost exactly in spirit, though not in actual facts, the book I planned then as an escapade; the spirit to be satiric, the structure wild. Precisely.
Yes, I repeat, a very happy, a singularly happy autumn.
Facts are: Clive is loved by a lady in Leicestershire: Mary loves (perhaps) Lord A. She wishes to have Clive back on terms. He forgets: has a twinge now & then, but is fancy free. Mary met them walking in Cavendish Square. Raymond will marry Valery, (so we think).
Thursday 22 December
I just open this for a moment, being dull of the head, to enter a severe reprimand of myself to myself. The value of society is that it snubs one. I am meretricious, mediocre; a humbug; am getting into the habit of flashy talk. Tinsel it seemed last night at the Keynes.61 was out of humour & so could see the transparency of my own sayings. Dadie said a true thing too: when V. lets her style get on top of her, one thinks only of that; when she uses cliches, one thinks what she means. But, he says, I have no logical power 6k live & write in an opium dream. And the dream is too often about myself.
Now with middle age drawing on, 6k age ahead it is important to be severe on such faults. So easily might I become a hare brained egotistic woman, exacting compliments, arrogant, narrow, withered. Nessa's children (I always measure myself against her, 6k find her much the largest, most humane of the two of us, think of her now with an admiration that has no envy in it: with some trace of the old childish feeling that "we were in league together against the world; 6k how proud I am of her triumphant winning of all our battles: as she [battles?] her way so nonchalantly modestly, almost anonymously past the goal, with her children round her; 6k only a little added tenderness (a moving thing in her) which shows me that she too feels wonder surprise at having passed so many terrors 6k sorrows safe—
The dream is too often about myself. To correct this, 6k to forget one's

own sharp absurd little personality, reputation 6k the rest of it, one should read; see outsiders; think more; write more logically; above all be full of work; 6k practise anonymity. Silence in company; or the quietest statement, not the showiest, is also 'indicated' as the doctors say. It was an empty party, rather, last night. Very nice here, though; 6k F.B. is I think willing.
On Christmas eve the Woolfs went by train to Lewes where they had left their car, and drove out to Charleston where they spent the next three nights before moving back to Monks House. The Bells were all away spending Christmas with Clive's widowed mother in Wiltshire.
	
		
		
		
1928
Tuesday 17 January
In half an hour or so Nessa & Duncan will look in on their way to Roger's to say good bye. This is the true break in the year: Bloomsbury is dispersed today till May, I suppose. Clive was off to Germany this morning.1
Yesterday we went to Hardy's funeral. What did I think of? Of Max Beerbohm's letter, just read; or a lecture to the Newnhamites about women's writing.2 At intervals some emotion broke in. But I doubt the capacity ofthe human animal for being dignified in ceremony. One catches a Bishops frown & twitch: sees his polished shiny nose; suspects the rapt spectacled young priest gazing at the cross he carries, of being a humbug; catches Robert Lynd's distracted haggard eye; then thinks of the mediocrity of Squire; next here is the coffin, an overgrown one; like a stage

coffin, covered with a white satin cloth: bearers elderly gentlemen rather red & stiff, holding to the corners: pigeons flying outside; insufficient artificial light; procession to poets corner; dramatic "In sure & certain hope of immortality" perhaps melodramatic. After dinner at Clive's Lytton protested that the great man's novels are the poorest of poor stuff; & can't read them. Lytton sitting or lying inert, with his eyes shut, or exasperated with them open. Lady Strachey slowly fading, but it may take years. Over all this broods for me, some uneasy sense, of change, & mortality, & how partings are deaths; 6k then a sense of my own fame— why should this come over me?—& then of its remoteness; & then the pressure of writing two articles on Meredith & furbishing up the Hardy.3 And Leonard sitting at home reading. And Max's letter. 6k a sense of the futility of it all.
Saturday 11 February
I am so cold I can hardly hold the pen. The futility of it all—so I broke off; & have indeed been feeling that rather persistently, or perhaps I should have written here. Hardy & Meredith together sent me torpid to bed with headache. I know the feeling now, when I can't spin a sentence, & sit mumbling & turning; & nothing flits by my brain which is as a blank window. So I shut my studio door, & go to bed, stuffing my ears with rubber; 6k there I lie a day or two. And what leagues I travel in the time! Such 'sensations' spread over my spine & head directly I give them the chance; such an exaggerated tiredness; such anguishes & despairs; & heavenly relief & rest; & then misery again. Never was anyone so tossed up 6k down by the body as I am, I think. But it is over: 6k put away; 6k Lord Sackville is dead 6k lies at Withyam, 6k I passed Knole with Vita yesterday 6k had to look away from the vast masterless house, without a flag. This is what she minds most. When she left the house behind the old cart horses, she went for ever, she said, after complete rule for three days.1
For some reason, I am hacking rather listlessly at the last chapter of Orlando, which was to have been the best. Always always the last chapter slips out of my hands. One gets bored. One whips oneself up. I still hope for a fresh wind, 6k dont very much bother, except that I miss the fun, which was so tremendously lively all October, November 6k December. I have my doubts if it is not empty; 6k too fantastic to write at such length. For the rest, Bloomsbury today revives. Clive is back: whereupon Mary asks us to lunch: 6k so we return to some flicker of the snowdrop pallor of very early spring.
My pen protests. This writing is nonsense, it says. And L. is with M[argaret] Ll[ewelyn]. Dfavies]. Pinker has the lice.   [Several ink blots.]
Saturday 18 February
I am happy to say I have still a few pounds in the Bank, 6k my own cheque book too. This great advance in dignity was made in the autumn. Out of my £60 I have bought a Heal bed; a cupboard, a fur coat, 6k now a strip of carpet for the hall. This financial revision has been a great success. And I pan out articles so as to write one 6k earn £30 a month. And I should be revising Lord Chesterfield at this moment, but I'm not. My mind is woolgathering away about Women 6k Fiction, which I am to read at Newnham in May. The mind is the most capricious of insects— flitting fluttering. I had thought to write the quickest most brilliant pages in Orlando yesterday—not a drop came, all, forsooth, for the usual physical reasons, which declared themselves today. It is the oddest feeling: as if a finger stopped the flow ofthe ideas in the brain: it is unsealed, 6k the blood rushes all over the place. Again, instead of writing O. I've been racing up 6k down the whole field of my lecture. And tomorrow, alas, we motor; for I must get back into the book—which has brightened the last few days satisfactorily. Not that my sensations in writing are an infallible guide.
We dined with Ka.2 She had unshaded all Nessa's lamps, 6k somehow commonplaced the house strangely. It was full too of those derelicts whom she collects—the earnest, the ugly, the unhappy. Never have I sat next such driftwood as Mrs Campbell. Garnett was as bad—an over-educated prig. So tired I cant talk—three large committees this afternoon —gave accurate information about cooking eggs.
Before that, there was Todd 6k Clive—Clive is ubiquitous. Todd like some primeval animal emerging from the swamp, muddy, hirsute. A

woman who is commercial—rather an exception in my world. She spoke of "getting my money back" as Gerald Duckworth might have spoken with the same look of rather hostile & cautious greed, as though the world were banded to rob her. This money-grubbing way is not attractive; but it is lightened by a shimmer of dash & 'chic' even. She stands on her two feet as she expresses it. She is starting a paper—I'm so bored with people starting papers in May! There's Desmond for another.3 But Todd has none of his bubble & gush. She finds work very dull. She likes life. [Six words omitted] flirting with Osbert I presume. She is tapir like, & the creatures nose snuffs pertinaciously after Bloomsbury.
Dadie came in for a moment, rather drawn & white, 'making money' too. We are a little out of that, Leonard 6k I: L. never makes a penny; I mean tries to: & I could almost wish we were more lavish in our ways. This is occasionally in my thoughts. And what else is? I doubt that I shall ever write another novel after O. I shall invent a new name for them.
Lunch with Mary; lunch with Clive; dinner with Clive; tea with Jane, raised in bed, with her old white head lifted up, on pillows, very aged & rather exalted, able only to talk or listen for io minutes or so.4 Mary & Jack simmering with polished domestic affluence & prettiness: gay bunches everywhere; & paint, & carpets; but not much backing to it. Jack develops, before 3 strikes, the storytelling manner: by 3.30 all the stories are told. Home to shabbiness.
Sunday 18 March
I have lost my writing board; an excuse for the anaemic state of this book. Indeed I only write now, in between letters, to say that Orlando was finished yesterday as the clock struck one. Anyhow the canvas is covered. There will be three months of close work needed, imperatively, before it can be printed; for I have scrambled & splashed, & the canvas shows through in a thousand places. But it is a serene, accomplished

feeling, to write, even provisionally, The End, & we go off on Saturday, with my mind appeased.
I have written this book quicker than any: & it is all a joke; & yet gay & quick reading I think; a writers holiday. I feel more & more sure that I will never write a novel again. Little bits of rhyme come in. So we go motoring across France on Saturday, & shall be back on April 17th for the summer. Time flies—oh yes: that summer should be here again; & I still have the faculty of wonder at it. The world swinging round again & bringing its green & blue close to ones eyes.
Since February I have been a little clouded with headache, had a touch of influenza; & so, with the lights down, & all energy turned to forcing my book along, have not written here. I dislike these months. Shall we try Rome next year? Control of life is what one should learn now: its economic management. I feel cautious, like a poor person, now I am 46. But I may be dead then, I think, & so take my French lessons now, instead of waiting.
Thursday 22 March
There are the last pages at the end of Orlando, & it is twenty five minutes to one; & I have written everything I have to write, & on Saturday we go abroad.
Yes its done—Orlando—begun on 8th October, as a joke; & now rather too long for my liking. It may fall between stools, be too long for a joke, & too frivolous for a serious book. All this I dismiss from a mind avid only of green fields. The sun; wine; sitting doing nothing. I have been for the last 6 weeks rather a bucket than a fountain; sitting to be shot into by one person after another. A rabbit that passes across a shooting gallery, & one's friends go pop-pop. Heaven be praised, Sibyl today puts us off, which leaves Dadie only, & a whole days solitude, please Heaven, tomorrow. But I intend to control this rabbit shooting business when I come back. And money making. I hope to settle in & write one nice little discreet article for £25 each month; & so live; without stress; & so read— what I want to read. At 46 one must be a miser; only have time for essentials.
But I think I have made moral reflections enough, & should describe people, save that, when seen so colourlessly, by duty not wish, one's mind is a little slack in taking notes. Morgan & Desmond were here to tea. Morgan more of the blue butterfly than ever. Unless I talk, he says nothing. And any shadow sends him flitting. Desmond comes in, round as a billiard ball; & this is true of his dear bubbling lazy mind; which has

such a glitter & lustre now from mere being at ease in the world that it puts me into a good temper to be with him. He describes, analyses, narrates; does not actually talk. All his blandishments are now active to get articles for "Life & Letters" which comes out in May. I am scarcely flattered now to be asked; yet of course dashed a little when I refuse Mrs van Doren's £120 & she takes no notice.1 And a little dashed, too, not to get the Femina prize—partly because I've been exhibited as a competitor & people will think me dashed: which I'm not, innately.2
Roger 6k Helen, Ka & Will, the other night. Roger malicious a little, & vain. "I am the most read critic in England, & yet I have nowhere to write." Analysed, this amounts to the fact that The Nation only pays him £5, 6k Konody gets more, & the pages of the Burlington are more thumbed at his articles than at MacColl's.3 There is an innocence in this vanity which is likeable; but I am touchy for the reputation of Bloomsbury. I thought I could see Ka & Will comparing us, & being glad we were not impeccable. They compare us with the political world: we them with our own. Will lay with his eyes shut, & I was rather sorry for him. He knows what Roger thinks of his pictures, & what I don't think—for I dont look at them; but he has the generosity to praise my books. We middleaged people now scarcely covet each others good opinion very seriously: are content to be different.
Watery blowy weather; & this time next week we shall be in the middle
of France.
The Woolfs spent the week end of 24 March at Monks House, and made the Newhaven-Dieppe channel crossing on Monday 26 March. They drove via Beauvais, Troyes, Beaune, Vienne, Orange and Aix, and reached Cassis on

Sunday 1 April. There they stayed in rooms in the Chateau de Fontcreuse which belonged to Colonel Teed, taking most of their meals with Vanessa and her family at 'La Bergere'. The return journey, beginning on 9 April, took them, with overnight stops at Tarascon, Florae, Aurillac, Gueret, Blois and Dr eux, to Dieppe; after a very rough crossing on 16 April, they left the car in Lewes and took the train to London.
Tuesday 17 April
Home again, as foretold, last night, & to settle the dust in my mind, write here. We have been across France & back—every inch of that fertile field traversed by the admirable Singer. And now towns & spires & scenes begin to rise in my mind as the rest sinks. I see Chartres in particular, the snail, with its head straight, marching across the flat country, the most distinguished of churches. The rose window is like a , jewel on black velvet. The outside is very intricate yet simple; elongated; somehow preserved from the fantastic & ornate. Grey weather dashed all over this; & I remember coming in at night in the wet often, & hearing the rain in hotels. Often I was bobbing up & down on my two glasses of vin du pays.
It was rather a rush & a cram—as these jumbled notes testify. Once we were high up on a mountain in a snow storm; & rather afraid of a long tunnel. Twenty miles often cut us off from civilisation. One wet afternoon we punctured in a mountain village & I went in & sat with the family— a nice scrupulous polite woman, a girl who was pretty, shy, had a friend called Daisy at Earlsfield. They caught trout & wild boars. Then on we went to Florae, where I found a book—Girardin's memoirs in the old bookcase that had been sold with the house. Always some good food & hot bottles at night. And there was Nessa & Duncan & Clive (who smacked me in public—curse him for an uneasy little upstart.) Oh & my prize—£40 from the French. And Julian. And one or two hot days & the Pont du Garde in the sun; & Les Beaux (this is where Dante got his idea of Hell Duncan said) & mounting all the time steadily was my desire for words, till I envisaged a sheet of paper & pen 6k ink as something of miraculous desirability—could even relish the scratch as if it were a divine kind of relief to me— And there was St Remy 6k the ruins in the sun. I forget now how it all went—how thing fitted to thing; but the eminences now emerge, 6k I noticed how, talking to Raymond at The Nation this afternoon we had already pitched on the high points. Before that, crossing the graveyard in the bitter windy rain, we saw Hope 6k a dark cultivated woman. But on they went past us, with the waver of an eye. Next moment

I heard Virginia, & turned 6k there was Hope coming back—"Jane died yesterday" she murmured, half asleep, talking distraught, 'out of herself.' We kissed by Cromwell's daughter's grave, where Shelley used to walk, for Jane's death.1 She lay dead outside the graveyard in that back room where we saw her lately raised on her pillows, like a very old person, whom life has tossed up, 6k left; exalted, satisfied, exhausted. Hope the colour of dirty brown paper. Then to the office, then home to work here; & now to work & work, as hard as I can.
Saturday 21 April
A bitter windy rainy day. There is no blue, no red, no green in this detestable spring. Furs are in the shops., I have walked across the Park with Leonard; come home; find the char in the studio; must write here instead of making, as I had meant, some carefully polished sentences—for Orlando is to tell the truth, damned rough.
Life is either too empty or too full. Happily, I never cease to transmit these curious damaging shocks. At 461 am not callous; suffer considerably; make good resolutions—still feel as experimental & on the verge of getting at the truth as ever. Oh 6k Vita—to change the subject 6k take up the burden of facts—has had a stupendous row with her mother—in the course of which she was made to take the pearl necklace from her neck, cut it in two with a pocket knife, deliver over the 12 central pearls, put the relics, all running loose, in an envelope the solicitor gave her. Thief, liar, I hope you'll be killed by an omnibus—so 'my honoured Lady Sackville' addressed her, trembling with rage in the presence of a secretary 6k a solicitor 6k a Chauffeur. The woman is said to be mad. Vita very gallant 6k wild 6k tossing her head 6k taking me to the Zoo 6k saying she was wild 6k free 6k wd. make her money now herself by writing.2
And I find myself again in the old driving whirlwind of writing against time. Have I ever written with it? But I vow I wont spend longer at Orlando, which is a freak; it shall come out in September, though the

perfect artist would revoke 6k rewrite 6k polish—infinitely. But hours remain over to be filled with reading something or other—I'm not sure what. What sort of summer do I desire? Now that I have 16 pounds to spend before July ist (on our new system) I feel freer: can afford a dress or a hat, 6k so may go about, a little, if I want. And yet the only exciting life is the imaginary one. Once I get the wheels spinning in my head, I dont want money much, or dress, or even a cupboard, a bed at Rodmell or a sofa.
Dined with Lydia 6k Maynard: two couples, elderly, childless distinguished. He 6k she both urbane 6k admirable. Grey comes at Maynard's temples. He is finer looking now: not with us pompous or great: simple, with his mind working always, on Russian, Bolshevists, glands, genealogies; always the proof of a remarkable mind when it overflows thus vigorously into byepaths. There are two royal stocks in England he says from which all intellect descends. He will work this out as if his fortune depended on it. Lydia is composed, 6k controlled. She says very sensible things.
We went, also, to Jane's funeral, getting 'there' (somewhere out of the world where buses pass only one every 15 minutes), just as the service ended;3 marching into the church clamorously; but it was only barely full ofthe dingiest people; cousins I fancy from the North, very drab: the only male relation afflicted, with a bubbly chin, a stubbly beard, 6k goggly eyes. Distinguished people drag up such queer chains of family when they die. They had hired Daimlers too, which succeeded the coffin at a foots pace. We walked to the grave; the clergyman, a friend, waited for the dismal company to collect; then read some of the lovelier, more rational parts of the Bible; 6k said, by heart, Abide with me. The gravedigger had given him, surreptitiously, a handful of clay, which he divided into three parts 6k dropped at the right moments. A bird sang most opportunely; with a gay indifference, 6k if one liked, hope, that Jane would have enjoyed. Then the incredibly drab female cousins advanced, each with a fat bunch of primroses 6k dropped them in; 6k we also advanced 6k looked down at the coffin at the bottom of a very steep brazen looking grave—But tho' L. almost cried, I felt very little—only the beauty of the Come unto me all ye that are weary; but as usual the obstacle of not believing dulled 6k bothered me. Who is 'God' 6k what the Grace of Christ? 6k what did they mean to Jane?
Raymond to tea—two hours animated admirable light 6k airy 6k well

seasoned talk, about facts mostly: ghosts; consciousness; novels: not people much. But he has his shirts made of figured tablecloths, shiny, hard.
And what am I to read? Pinker is back. And Leonard having tea with his mother. And perhaps the old woman has sighed herself through my room, & I can go down & do that typing, & write to the little man who smacks me in public & appeals for my pity—Clive I mean.4
Tuesday 24 April
Waiting for Gumbo [Marjorie Strachey]—how I hate waiting for anybody! Can't settle, read, think—so I write: an odd tribute to the uses I put this diary to. And I should be typing O. in the basement. Must now do 10 pages daily till June 1st. Well, I like being an ass on a mill round.
In from the triumph of buying a dress & a coat for about 5.10. What one must do is to face the girl with one's naked kindly searching eye: speak firmly; ask for a looking glass & study effects. Then they quail, under powder 6k paint. A lovely soaring summer day this: winter sent howling home to his arctic. I was reading Othello last night, 6k was impressed by the volley 6k volume 6k tumble of his words: too many I should say, were I reviewing for the Times. He put them in when tension was slack. In the great scenes, everything fits like a glove. The mind tumbles 6k splashes among words when it is not being urged on: I mean, the mind of a very great master of words who is writing with one hand. He abounds. The lesser writers stint. As usual, impressed by Shre. But my mind is very bare to words—English words—at the moment: they hit me, hard, I watch them bounce 6k spring. I've read only French for 4 weeks. An idea comes to me for an article on French; what we know of it.
Friday 4 May
And now theres the Femina prize to record before I go off this brilliant summer day to tea with Miss Jenkins in Doughty Street.1 I am going dutifully, not to snub the female young. But I shall be overpowering I doubt not. But it is a wonderful day.

The prize was an affair of dull stupid horror: a function; not alarming; stupefying. Hugh Walpole saying how much he disliked my books; rather, how much he feared for his own. Little Miss Robins, like a red breast, creeping out.2 I remember your mother—the most beautiful Madonna 6k at the same time the most complete woman of the world. Used to come 6k see me in my flat (I see this as a summer visit on a hot day). She never confided. She would suddenly say something so unexpected, from that Madonna face, one thought it vicious. This I enjoyed: nothing else made much impression. Afterwards there was the horror of having looked ugly in cheap black clothes. I cannot control this complex. I wake at dawn with a start. Also the 'fame' is becoming vulgar 6k a nuisance. It means nothing; 6k yet takes one's time. Americans perpetually. Croly; Gaige; offers:
We have seen an endless number of people—Eddie, Lytton, Miss Ritchie, Francis, Vita,—6k now the minute Jenkins.3
Thursday 31 May
No I cannot read Proust at the moment—
Leonard is reading Orlando, which goes to the printer tomorrow. It is

very quiet at the moment. Whitsun is over. We were at Rodmell & saw the races, where the marsh used to be. And our field is sold to Allinson— who is going to build.4 And what then? I have no brain left over to think with. And Leonard is arguing in the basement with Dadie. What can it be about? Pinker is asleep in the chair. Angelica comes back tomorrow. I feel a kind of drought caused by the lack of Nessa, & ask how shall I manage if we are apart 6 months, not only 4?5 But my creed is to batter down opposition. I have seen—
I daresay a good many people, Rose Macaulay, Rebecca West, Maurois flash to mind in a bunch last week,6 6k Todd's room; rather to her credit, workmanlike; Garland pear[l]hung & silken; Todd as buxom as a badger. Rebecca a hardened old reprobate I daresay, but no fool; & the whole atmosphere professional; no charm, except the rather excessive charm of Garland.
Clive's book out—a very superficial one, L. says.7
The sun is out again; I have half forgotten Orlando already, since L. has read it & it has half passed out of my possession. I think it lacks the sort of hammering I should have given it if I had taken longer: is too freakish 6k unequal. Very brilliant now 6k then. As for the effect of the whole, that I cant judge. Not, I think 'important' among my works. L. says a satire.
Gosse is dead, 6k I am half reconciled to him by they're saying in the papers that he chose to risk a dangerous operation rather than be an invalid for life. This kind of vitality always gets me. But—lies otherwise

flourish round his grave, 6k poor dear Desmond with 3 children to keep has to be as profuse of them as anybody.8
We met him yesterday in Kingsway, just as I was thinking how I should describe him if I wrote a Memoir, as Molly insists. He loomed up as if my thought had made him visible. He gave me the first number of his paper.
Rose Macaulay says "Yes I won the prize"—rather peevishly.9 I think at once that she is jealous, 6k test whatever else she says with a view to finding out whether she is or not. About Colefax: "I'm the only one of all my friends who isn't asked there." About work: 'I've got to work tomorrow' I say, excusing myself for not going to Raymond's party. "So have we all" rather sharply. 6k so on. This shows through a dozen little phrases, as we're talking of America, articles 6kc: she is jealous of me; anxious to compare us: but I may imagine it: 6k it shows my own jealousy no doubt, as suspicions always do. One cdn't know them if one hadn't got them. And now to Angelica with a packet of bulls eyes. I am again beginning to read.
L. takes Orlando more seriously than I had expected. Thinks it in some ways better than The Lighthouse; about more interesting things, 6k with more attachment to life, 6k larger. The truth is I expect I began it as a joke, 6k went on with it seriously. Hence it lacks some unity. He says it is very original. Anyhow I'm glad to be quit this time of writing 'a novel'; 6k hope never to be accused of it again. Now I want to write some very j closely reasoned criticism; book on fiction; an essay of some sort (but not ij Tolstoy for the Times). Dr Burney's evening party I think for Desmond.10 And then? I feel anxious to keep the hatch down: not to let too many projects come in. Something abstract poetic next time—I dont know. I rather like the idea of these Biographies of living people. Ottoline suggests herself—but no. And I must tear up all that manuscript, 6k write a great many notes 6k adventure out into the world—as I shall do tomorrow, when I go to have my ears pierced with Vita.

June weather. Still, bright, fresh. Owing to the Lighthouse (car) I dont feel so shut in London as usual, & can imagine the evening on some moor now, or in France without the envy I used to have, in London on a fine evening. Also London itself perpetually attracts, stimulates, gives me a play & a story & a poem, without any trouble, save that of moving my legs through the streets. I walked Pinker to Grays Inn Gardens this afternoon, & saw—Red Lion Square: Morris'es house; thought of them on winters evenings in the 50ties; thought we are just as interesting;11 saw the (street) Great Ormond St where a dead girl was found yesterday; saw & heard the Salvation Army making Xtianity gay for the people: a great deal of nudging & joking on the part of very unattractive young men & women; making it lively, I suppose; & yet, to be truthful, when I watch them I never laugh or criticise, but only feel how strange & interesting this is: wonder what they mean by 'Come to the Lord.' I daresay exhibitionism accounts for some of it: the applause ofthe gallery; this lures boys to sing hymns; & kindles shop boys to announce in a loud voice that they are saved. It is what writing for the Evening Standard is for Rose Macaulay & I was going to say myself: but so far I have not done it.12
Wednesday 20 June
So sick of Orlando I can write nothing. I have corrected the proofs in a week; & cannot spin another phrase. I detest my own volubility. Why be always spouting words? Also I have almost lost the power of reading. Correcting proofs 5, 6, or 7 hours a day, writing in this 6k that meticulously, I have bruised my reading faculty severely. Take up Proust after dinner 6k put him down. This is the worst time of all. It makes me suicidal. Nothing seems left to do. All seems insipid 6k worthless. Now I will watch 6k see how I resurrect. I think I shall read something—say a life of Goethe. Then I shall visit about. Mercifully, Nessa is back. My earth is watered again. I go back to words of one syllable: feel come over me the feathery change: rather true that: as if my physical body put on some soft comfortable, skin. She is a necessity to me—as I am not to her. I run to her as the wallaby runs to the old kangaroo. She is also very cheerful, solid, happy. The trifles that annoy other people, she passes off; as if her

happiness were a million or two in the bank. And how masterfully she controls her dozen lives; never in a muddle, or desperate, or worried; never spending a pound or a thought needlessly; yet with it all free, careless, airy, indifferent: a very notable achievement.
Julian dines with us tonight to meet Miss Sylva Norman whom I fetched up from complete nonentity on the telephone last night.1 Another marvel of science. There she was in 10 minutes after we thought of her saying she would LOVE to come. Julian is a vast fat powerful sweet tempered engaging young man, into whose arms I let myself fall, half sister, half mother, 6k half (but arithmetic denies this) the mocking stirring contemporary friend. Mercifully Julian has his instincts sane 6k normal: has a wide forehead, 6k considerable address 6k competence in the management of life. But my tooth is aching. They will dine with us; 6k that is what I am ripe for—to go adventuring on the streams of other peoples lives—speculating, adrift
Friday 22 June
So far I wrote 6k was interrupted—always interrupted; am now off to Ruislip with Pinker to wed her, 6k it is
Saturday 7 July
6k a Saturday morning, very hot 6k fine.
All last night I dreamt of Katherine Mansfield 6k wonder what dreams are; often evoke so much more emotion, than thinking does—almost as if she came back in person 6k was outside one, actively making one feel; instead of a figment called up 6k recollected, as she is, now, if I think of her. Yet some emotion lingers on the day after a dream; even though I've now almost forgotten what happened in the dream, except that she was lying on a sofa in a room high up, 6k a great many sad faced women were round her. Yet somehow I got the feel of her, 6k of her as if alive again, more than by day.
At Long Barn yesterday, a good rather happy visit. I'm interested by the gnawing down of strata in friendship; how one passes unconsciously to different terms; takes things easier; dont mind at all hardly about dress or anything; scarcely feel it an exciting atmosphere, which, top, has its drawback from the "fizzing" point of view: yet is saner, perhaps deeper.

Lay by the black currant bushes lecturing Vita on her floundering habits with the Campbells for instance. Mrs C. beat by her husband, all because V. will come triumphing, with her silver & her coronets 6k her footmen into the life ofa herring-cooker. She cooks herrings on a gas stove, I said, always remembering my own phrases.
But having thus scrambled in a page, I must go—& yet want to stay 6k write about Sterne.1
Monks House Rodmell. Wednesday 8 August1
Eddy has just gone, leaving me the usual feeling: why is not human intercourse more definite, tangible: why aren't I left holding a small round substance, say of the size of a pea, in my hand; something I can put in a box 6k look at? There is so little left. Yet these people one sees are fabric only made once in the world; these contacts we have are unique; 6k if E. were, say killed tonight, nothing definite would happen to me; yet his substance is never again to be repeated. Our meeting is—but the thread of this idea slips perpetually; constantly though it recurs, with sadness, to my mind: how little our relationships matter; 6k yet they are so important: in him, in me, something to him, to me, infinitely sentient, of the highest vividness, reality. But if I died tonight, he too would continue. Something illusory then enters into all that part of life. I am so important to myself: yet of no importance to other people: like the shadow passing over the downs. I deceive myself into thinking that I am important to other people: that makes part of my extreme vividness to myself: as a matter of fact, I dont matter; 6k so part of my vividness is unreal; gives me a sense of illusion. Eddy says he thinks "What impression am I making?" constantly 6k is agitated: as a matter of fact, he is probably making no impression: his agitation is about nothing: he is mistaken.
But, superficially speaking—for fundamentally I was thinking a thousand other thoughts; his presence was only I suppose a light on the surface of my mind—something green or iron-coloured or grey—while the water itself rushed on, in its old fierce way—thoughts about my writing; 6k about old age; 6k about buying the field (we bought it this morning) 6k about the children being noisy; 6k if I had bought Southease. All this went on sub-cutaneously. Yet his presence somehow checked the

flow of sub-cutaneous life. I was always having to think what comes next? How am I to break into this other life which is 6 inches off mine in the deck chair in the orchard? So that my own thoughts could not flow deep or rapid, as they are doing now that Eddy is on his way to Tunbridge Wells. And what remains of Eddy is now in some ways more vivid, though more transparent, all of him composing itself in my mind, all I could get of him, 6k making itself a landscape appropriate to it; making a work of art for itself.
I am, as I write, wherever I come to a stop, looking out of the lodge window, at our field; 6k the little cottage boys with the cursed shrill voices, playing cricket halfway down it; 6k as usual I am sentimental 6k worried. Children playing: yes, 6k interrupting me; yes 6k I have no children of my own; 6k Nessa has; 6k yet I dont want them any more, since my ideas so possess me; 6k I detest more 6k more interruption; 6k the slow heaviness of physical life, 6k almost dislike peoples bodies, I think, as I grow older; 6k want always to cut that short, 6k get my utmost fill of the marrow, of the essence.
I write thus partly in order to slip the burden of writing narrative, as for instance; we came here a fortnight ago. And we lunched at Charleston 6k Vita came 6k we were offered the field 6k we went to see the farm at Lime Kiln. Yet no doubt I shall be more interested, come io years, in facts; 6k shall want, as I do when I read, to be told details, details, so that I may look up from the page 6k arrange them too, into one of those makings up which seem so much truer done thus, from heaps of non-assorted facts, than now I can make them, when it is almost immediately being done (by me) under my eyes. It was a fine day, last Monday I rather think; 6k we drove through Ripe; 6k there was a girl 6k her feller at the gate in a narrow lane; 6k we had to interrupt them to turn the motor. I thought how the things they had been saying were dammed, like a river, by our interruption; 6k they stood there half amused, yet impatient, telling us to go to the left, but the road was up. They were glad when we went; yet gave us a flash of interest. Who are these people in their motor car: where are they going?—6k then this sunk beneath the mind, 6k they forgot us completely. We went on. And then we reached the farm. The oasts had umbrella spokes poking out at the top: all was so ruined 6k faded. The Tudor farm house was almost blind; very small eyebrowed windows; old Stuart farmers must have peered out over the flat land, very dirty, ill-kempt, like people in slums. But they had dignity: at least thick walls; fireplaces; 6k solidity whereas now the house is lived in by one old, weedy pink faced man, who flung himself in his armchair. Go where you like— go anywhere, he said, loose jointed, somehow decayed, like the hop oasts;

& damp like the mildewed carpets, & sordid, like the beds with the pots sticking out under them. The walls were sticky; the furniture mid Victorian; little light came through. It was all dying, decaying; & he had been there 50 years, & it will drop to pieces, since there is not enough beauty or strength to make anyone repair it.2
Sunday 12 August
Shall I now continue this soliloquy, or shall I imagine an audience, which will make me describe?
This sentence is due to the book on fiction which I am now writing— once more, O once more.3 It is a hand to mouth book. I scribble down whatever I can think of about Romance, Dickens &c. must hastily [?] gorge on Jane Austen tonight & dish up something tomorrow. All this criticism however may well be dislodged by the desire to write a story. The Moths hovers some where at the back of my brain. Janie & Julian have just gone. Julian a little in the style of Jem, only so much saner: broad browed, wavy haired, vast, fat, powerful, good-tempered.4 He still laughs a great deal; but perhaps less than he did. Perhaps he is sticking his pitchfork in the ground. Janie is a little lapdog girl; like those pug faced prominent eyed wrinkled nosed little dogs that women carry about the streets; intelligent, vivacious, opening her mouth wide & snapping it shut; on one side a carpenters granddaughter—on the other a Strachey. Perhaps a little common do I mean? But Clive yesterday at Charleston said that there were no class distinctions. We had tea from bright blue cups under the pink light ofthe giant hollyhock. We were all a little drugged with the country: a little bucolic I thought. It was lovely enough—made me envious of its country peace: the trees all standing securely—why did my

eye catch the trees? The look of things has a great power over me. Even now, I have to watch the rooks beating up against the wind, which is high. & still I say to myself instinctively "Whats the phrase for that?" & try to make more & more vivid the roughness of the air current & the tremor of the rooks wing (deep breasting it) slicing—as if the air were full of ridges & ripples & roughnesses; they rise & sink, up & down, as if the exercise (pleased them) rubbed & braced them like swimmers in rough water. But what a little I can get down with my pen of what is so vivid to my eyes, & not only to my eyes: also to some nervous fibre or fan like membrane in my spine.
Janie Julian Leonard & I sat in the orchard till the wind got too strong, & I made them come out on the marsh & was sorry the river was low, or they might have praised it. And (irrelevantly) Miss Ritchie praises Orlando, & I was pleased till I thought, perhaps this is gratitude for our £20. Yet I dont think much either way about Orlando. Odd, how I feel myself under orders; always marching on a definite stage with each book, tho' it is one I set myself. And Duncan at Charleston was a little too aloof & supercilious seeming.
Tuesday 14 August
Just back from Long Barn & Dottie's new house, Penn in the Rocks.5 Can one really be in love with a house? Is there not something sterile, so that one's mind becomes stringy in these passions? She is too anxious for other people to praise it. And I don't want possessions. I think this is true. I dont want to be Dottie collecting endless settees & arm chairs round myself. But then I have now a pressing sense of the flight of time; & if one is so soon to arrive, why pack all these things? More truthfully, if one is so soon to start, why prepare all these impedimenta. I feel on the verge ofthe world, about to take flight. Dottie on the other hand feels "I have at least, in spite of every other grudge on the part of fate, 10 or 15 thousand a year; & it is only fair that I should get from my money what I can." Somehow angrily then she sets to work to make her money slave for her. She has bought for ever & ever all these couchant rocks; rocks like kneeling elephants; agonised writhing rocks elongated rocks, rocks with grotesque roots grown into them, & Japanese trees on top. She runs about,

defiant strident a little discordant in her top boots with her dogs 6k says "I'm so tired—so worn out", gesticulates, exaggerates. I like the aristocratic tradition of space & a few good things. The house itself is now in sections. Haifa ceiling (overhangs) intersects what were & will be dining room & bedroom above. This gives the house a provisional air; it is not a house that has been there 300 years, & housed Penn & other families; it is nothing—which in a house is distressing.
After that country, though, how I adore the emptiness, bareness, air & colour of this! Really. I would not give this view for Dottie's rocks. A relic I think of my fathers feeling for the Alps—this ecstasy of mine over the bare slope of Asheham hill. But then, as I remind myself, half the beauty of a country or a house comes from knowing it. One remembers old lovelinesses: knows that it is now looking ugly; waits to see it light up; knows where to find its beauty; how to ignore the bad things. This one can't do the first time of seeing. But they build with beautiful blocks of grey stone in Kent. D.'s farmhouse was the very house for me, solid, high, with the shape ofthe stone showing in the wall. This is all thrown in with her rocks. And she ecstasi[s]es over them, fancying them sympathetic to her genius, & makes them into part of her belief in her own genius.
Monks House looked very nice, unexpectedly so, & the great lily in the window has now four flowers. They opened in the night. So I was appeased aesthetically for my disappointment in having no letters—not one. I was going to remark however that Dottie's rocks are powdered pale greys 6k bright greens; they are grey as elephant backs. There are, too, bunches of scarlet berries hanging against them: only all too verdant, mossy, steamy, & enclosed for my taste. However, in the train it struck me that it is, even from one's own point of view, a great advantage that other people should like trees & so on; Why—I cant at the moment remember.
Friday 31 August
This is the last day of August, & like almost all of them of extraordinary beauty. Each day is fine enough & hot enough for sitting out; but also full of wandering clouds; & that fading & rising of the light which so enraptures me in the downs: which I am always comparing to the light beneath an alabaster bowl, &c. The corn is now stood about in rows of three for our [four or] five solid shaped yellow cakes—rich, it seems, with eggs & spice: good to eat. Sometimes I see the cattle galloping 'like mad' as Dostoevsky would say, in the brooks. The clouds—if I could describe them I would: one yesterday had flowing hair on it like the very fine

white hair of an old man. At this moment they are white in a leaden sky; but the sun, behind the house, is making the grass green. I walked to the racecourse today & saw a weasel.
Morgan was here for the week end; timid, touchy, infinitely charming. One night we got drunk, & talked of sodomy, 6k sapphism, with emotion —so much so that next day he said he had been drunk. This was started by Radclyffe Hall & her meritorious dull book. They wrote articles for Hubert all day, & got up petitions; & then Morgan saw her & she screamed like a herring gull, mad with egotism & vanity. Unless they say her book is good, she wont let them complain of the laws. Morgan said that Dr Head can convert the sodomites.6 "Would you like to be converted?" Leonard asked. "No" said Morgan, quite definitely. He said he thought Sapphism disgusting: partly from convention, partly because he disliked that women should be independent of men.
Probably the reason why I shall be so much bored this week end by Mrs Woolf is that we shall not be able to say a word we mean.7 It is like talking to a child; a child, too, with 'feelings': a child with "rights" & a sense of propriety & respectability & what ought to be said & done. Having made up all these principles she is, & they all are, secretly dissatisfied; because they, naturally, get no pleasure from life; are cased in thick wool from any direct contact; & so these people—an immense class—are always uneasy unless they are eating, being flattered, or doing some natural task, like nursing a child. And then, if the child is Leonard, he grows up & is horribly bored by you.
I must now begin Peacock, without attempting to describe the extraordinary primeval appearance of the farm wagons; so laden with the hay in the brooks that they look like some vast shaggy animal moving on very short legs.
We have seen Mr James about the field; 6k will soon, I hope, sign the agreement, or cheque; 6k put up a fence, which is my first act as a

landowner to keep the cottage children out.8 Nessa, being a mother, & thus not sentimental about children, says "They can easily play somewhere else."9
Monday 3 September
The battle of Dunbar, the Battle of Worcester, 6k the death of Cromwell —how often it seems to me I said that to my father ("my" father, not 'father' any more) at St Ives; standing bolt upright in the dining room at Talland House. And it is a perfect 3rd of September day.1 Leonard gave me the blue glass jug today, because he was cross when I slapped his nose with sweet peas, & because I was nice to his mother; & when I went into luncheon I saw it on the table. Indeed, I almost cried. He went to Brighton to get it for me. "I thought of it just as I was getting into the car" he said. Perhaps I have analysed his motives wrongly.
Seldom have I felt as tired as I did last night. This shaky ramshackle old lady of 76 wore us out. Her talk—I have written it for Nessa so cannot repeat2—never stops; never follows a line; is always about people; starts anywhere; at any moment; breaks into a Schubert trio: did you know Len that Mr Harris lives in Gordon Sqre? So on to his daughters; how she met one playing bridge &c. What makes it difficult is that she divines states of feeling to some extent, & would say pointedly "You must often think of your writing when you are not writing, Virginia", when through exhaustion I became silent. I had one moment of peculiar & acute discomfort this morning, when she became 'intimate', & said how much she had been touched when I sat beside her in the car yesterday. Why did I hate it so? I felt the horror of family life, & the terrible threat to one's liberty that I used to feel with father, Aunt Mary or George.3 It is an

emotion one never gets from any other human relationship. She had the right to exact this on my part; 6k would feel pleasure 6k pain irrationally, 6k somehow put her claws in me. These feelings are as violent as any. And there was the sentimental, yet very vain 6k almost insanely selfish discourse about her love for her children; how they—these dull plain serviceable Jews 6k Jewesses—were all splendid men 6k women; at which my gorge rose. How strangely she made everything commonplace, ugly, suburban, notwithstanding a charm too: something fresh 6k vital such as old women have, 6k not, I think, old men. But to be attached to her as daughter would be so cruel a fate that I can think of nothing worse; 6k thousands of women might be dying of it in England today: this tyranny of mother over daughter, or father; their right to the due being as powerful as anything in the world. And then, they ask, why women dont write poetry. Short of killing Mrs W. nothing could be done. Day after day one's life would be crumpled up like a bill for 10 pen[ce] 3 farthings. Nothing has ever been said of this.
Monday 10 September
This is written, as 'this' is so often written, to fill up a little jagged piece of time, with Kennedy, the soft duckling boy, with a bill that opens wide 6k says 'Quack' in the drawing room, 6k Leonard talking to Mr James about the field.4 Desmond, who lunched here with Julian has just gone. We spent the afternoon—hour after hour wasting away again, or why not say for once turning to gold 6k silver—for I should only have been reading Moby Dick otherwise—coining gold 6k silver talk then—talk very intimate now, more so than ever: a continuation of our talk in Tavistock Sqre the other day: there he said he had now 12 years to live; nine to be exact: 6k here we talked ofhis work, money, women, children, 6k writing; till I took him along the Roman road; 6k back to tea. I was amused to find that when Rebecca West says "men are snobs" she gets an instant rise out of Desmond; so I retorted on him with the condescending phrase used about women novelists 'limitations' in Life 6k Letters.5 But there was no acrimony in this. We talked with fertility;

never working a seam dry. Do you suppose then that we are now coming like the homing rooks back to the tops of our trees? & that all this cawing is the beginning of settling in for the night? I seem to notice in several of my friends some endearing & affecting cordiality: & a pleasure in intimacy; as if the sun were sinking. Often that image comes to me with some sense of my physical state being colder now, the sun just off one; the old disc of one's being growing cooler—but it is only just beginning: 6k one will turn cold & silver like the moon.
This has been a very animated summer: a summer lived almost too much in public. Often down here I have entered into a sanctuary; a nunnery; had a religious retreat; of great agony once; & always some terror: so afraid one is of loneliness: of seeing to the bottom of the vessel. That is one of the experiences I have had here in some Augusts; & got then to a consciousness of what I call 'reality': a thing I see before me; something abstract; but residing in the downs or sky; beside which nothing matters; in which I shall rest & continue to exist. Reality I call it. And I fancy sometimes this is the most necessary thing to me: that which I seek. But who knows—once one takes a pen & writes? How difficult not to go making 'reality' this & that, whereas it is one thing. Now perhaps this is my gift; this perhaps is what distinguishes me from other people; I think it may be rare to have so acute a sense of something like that—but again, who knows? I would like to express it too.
Pinker had 4 puppies the day (Friday) we went to the Bagenals 6k Dotty. Dotty was rust red, shabby, intense a little; she showed us the rocks. Leonard 'took against' her, as nurses say; violently.6 We drove home very fast. I on the other hand took in favour of Barbara—& wished I had gone up alone with her on to the downs. I—perhaps Leonard interrupted here.
his monthly Life and Letters, in a review of Another Country by H. du Coudray, he had written: 'If, like the reporter, you believe that female novelists should only aspire to excellence by courageously acknowledging the limitations of their sex (Jane Austen and, in our own time, Mrs Virginia Woolf, have demonstrated how gracefully this gesture can be accomplished), Miss du Coudray's first novel may at the outset prove a little disappointing, since here is a writer definitely bent upon the attainment of masculine standards.'
The Bagenals, Nicholas Beauchamp (1891-1974) and Barbara, nee Hiles (b. 1891), had married in 1918 when the former was still in the army and the latter working briefly as an assistant in the Hogarth Press in Richmond (see / VW Diary). He had become an expert on fruit trees and, since 1922, had been a lecturer at the East Mailing Research Station near Maidstone. The Woolfs called on Dorothy Wellesley at Penn's Rocks on the way home. For LW's virulent reaction to her, see also III VW Letters, no. 1922.

Monday 17 September
I have precisely 5 minutes before dinner. Quentin has swallowed those precious two hours in which I was to have read Dorothy Osborne:7 Quentin grown elegant 6k self conscious, liking to use French words; very sophisticated, showing in every movement now the shadow of our faults, as a set; uneasy, I doubt not; quick, sensitive; but wanting something of Julian's force 6k simplicity. So they change parts, growing, changing, turning from fat to thin. The drawing room smells with his paints—the gramophone like Moby Dick is white. Rachel came in with Angelica. She has quicksilver eyes, mended stockings, all the charm 6k dexterity of a poor clever man's child, whose wits are kept brushed, who mends her stockings, who lives on her adventures.
Desmond was here, talking the other day: intimate again, 6k yet too urbane, perhaps; or do I think this from the letter that so annoyed me— speaking of my paper's "butterfly lightness"—how angry I was, how depressed I became.8 Leonard agrees that he has a complex, which leads him to belittle 6k fondle thus.
Saturday 22 September
This is written on the verge of my alarming holiday in Burgundy. I am alarmed of 7 days alone with Vita: interested; excited, but afraid—she may find me out, I her out. I may (6k theres Mabel the Bride in her white dress at the pump. The bridegroom, a carter out of work, wears white socks. Are they pure? I doubt it. They are going to spend their honeymoon near Pevensey. He was 15 minutes late 6k we saw her come in wearing a wreath. And I felt this is the heart of England—this wedding in the country: history I felt; Cromwell; The Osbornes; Dorothy's shepherdesses singing: of all of whom Mr 6k Mrs Jarrad seem more the descendants than I am: as if they represented the unconscious breathing of England 6k L. 6k I, leaning over the wall, were detached, unconnected.9 I suppose our

thinking is the cause of this. We dont belong to any 'class'; we thinkers: might as well be French or German. Yet I am English in some way—)
But I was saying I should on the whole be confident about this French journey—that it will turn out well. I'm afraid of the morning most; & 3 o'clock in the afternoon; 6k wanting something Vita does not want. And I shall spend the money that might have bought a table or a glass. What one buys in foreign travel is a series of scenes; which gradually diminish to one or two, such as I still have of Greece & Venice as I saw them when I was 24 or 5. And I shall love the freedom from hours; & looking about; & the thought of coming back; 6k sitting talking, 6k some things I shall read; 6k one or two views, 6k—
This has been the finest, 6k not only finest, but loveliest, summer in the world. Still, though it blows, how clear 6k bright it is; 6k the clouds are opalescent; the long barns on my horizon mouse coloured; the stacks pale gold. Owning the field has given a different orient to my feelings about Rodmell. I begin to dig myself in 6k take part in it. And I shall build another storey to the house if I make money. But the news of Orlando is black. We may sell a third that we sold of The Lighthouse before publication—Not a shop will buy save in 6es 6k i2es. They say this is inevitable. No one wants biography. But it is a novel, says Miss Ritchie. But it is called a biography on the title page, they say. It will have to go to the Biography shelf. I doubt therefore that we shall do more than cover expenses—a high price to pay for the fun of calling it a biography. And I was so sure it was going to be the one popular book! Also it should be 10/6 or 12/6 not 9/- Lord, lord! Thus I must write some articles this winter, if we are to have nest eggs at the Bank. Down here I have flung myself tooth 6k nail on my fiction book, 6k should have finished the first draft but for Dorothy Osborne whom I'm dashing off. It will need entire re-writing but the grind is done—the rushing through book after book 6k now what shall I read? These novels have hung about me so long. Mercy it is to be quit of them; 6k shall I read English poetry, French memoirs— shall I read now for a book to be called "The Lives ofthe Obscure"? And when, I wonder, shall I begin the Moths? Not until I am pressed into it by those insects themselves. Nor have I any notion what it is to be like—a completely new attempt I think. So I always think.
A very gay active summer. Dined with the Keynes' to meet Lord Gage last Wednesday—found him with his flat face 6k Circassian blood, more °f a character than I expected. Clive with inverse snobbery had run him down. We talked about the King, 6k he snubbed me by saying that he remarked an odd fact—everyone talks to him about the King. Every class, every kind of person, is interested to know what the King has for dinner.

And here was I, the intellectual, the labour woman, doing just the same thing. And there were the Russell Cookes; her I liked; him I hated.10 A woman is in some ways so much better than a man—more natural, juicy, unfettered. But then he is a bounder, a climber, a shoving young man, who wants to be smart, cultivated, go-ahead 6k all the rest of it. I must use that cliche because I must do my Osborne article. 6k it is getting cold out here.
On 24 September VW and Vita Sackville-West sailed from Newhaven to spend a week together in Burgundy {their progress may be followed in III VW Letters, nos. 1926-32 to LW), coming back to England on 1 October. On 4 October the Woolfs returned to Tavistock Square, lunching with Vita at Long Barn on the way. Orlando was published on 11 October. On 20 October, taking Vanessa and Angelica, the Woolfs drove to Cambridge; they stayed the night with Pernel Strachey, the Principal of Newnham, where that evening VW read a paper to the Arts Society, and the next day lunched with George Rylands in his rooms at King's. The following week she again went to Cambridge, this time by train and with Vita, and spoke to the Girton ODTAA Society {26 October). These two papers, on 'Women and Fiction,' were to be expanded and published a year later as A Room of One's Own {in which Mrs Rylands' lunch party is memorably if extravagantly described).
Saturday 27 October
A scandal, a scandal, to let so much time slip, 6k I leaning on the Bridge watching it go. Only leaning has not been my pose: running up 6k down, irritably, excitedly restlessly. And the stream viciously eddying. Why do I write these metaphors? Because I have written nothing for an age.
Orlando has been published. I went to Burgundy with Vita. We did not find each other out. It flashed by. Yet I was glad to see Leonard again. How disconnected this is! My ambition is from this very moment, 8 minutes to six, on Saturday evening, to attain complete concentration again. When I have written here, I am going to open Fanny Burney's

diaries, & work solidly at that article which poor Miss McKay cables about.11 am going to read; to think. I gave up reading & thinking on the 24th of Sept when I went to France. I came back, & we plunged into London & publishing. I am a little sick of Orlando. I think I am a little indifferent now what anyone thinks. Joy's life's in the doing—I murder, as usual, a quotation:21 mean its the writing, not the being read that excites me. And as I can't write while I'm being read, I am always a little hollow hearted; whipped up; but not so happy as in solitude. The reception, as they say, surpassed expectations. Sales beyond our record for the first week. I was floating rather lazily on praise, when Squire barked in the Observer, but even as I sat reading him on the backs last Sunday in the showering red leaves & their illumination, I felt the rock of self esteem untouched in me. "This doesn't really hurt" I said to myself; even now; & sure enough, before evening I was calm, untouched. And now theres Hugh [Walpole] in the Morning Post to spread the butter again, & Rebecca West—such a trumpet call of praise—thats her way—that I feel a little sheepish & silly. And now no more of that I hope.3
Thank God, my long toil at the women's lecture is this moment ended. I I am back from speaking at Girton, in floods of rain. Starved but valiant young women—that's my impression. Intelligent eager, poor; & destined to become schoolmistresses in shoals. I blandly told them to drink wine & have a room of their own. Why should all the splendour, all the luxury of life be lavished on the Julians & the Francises, & none on the Phares & the Thomases?4 There's Julian not much relishing it, perhaps. I fancy

sometimes the world changes. I think I see reason spreading. But I should have liked a closer 6k thicker knowledge of life. I should have liked to deal with real things sometimes. I get such a sense of tingling & vitality from an evenings talk like that; one's angularities & obscurities are smoothed 6k lit. How little one counts, I think: how little anyone counts; how fast 6k furious 6k masterly life is; 6k how all these thousands are swimming for dear life. I felt elderly 6k mature. And nobody respected me. They were very eager, egotistical, or rather not much impressed by age 6k repute. Very little reverence or that sort of thing about. The corridors of Girton are like vaults in some horrid high church cathedral—on 8c on they go, cold 6k shiny—with a light burning. High gothic rooms; acres of bright brown wood; here 6k there a photograph.
And we saw Trinity 6k King's this morning. Now to concentrate on English literature—forgetting Mary 6k Tom 6k how we went to be read aloud to, 6k Lady Cunard, 6k Clive back 6k Nessa back, 6k the Well of Loneliness. But Thank God to get back to writing again.5
Wednesday 7 November
And this shall be written for my own pleasure,—
But that phrase inhibits me: for if one writes only for one's own pleasure,—I dont know what it is that happens. I suppose the convention of writing is destroyed; therefore one does not write at all. I am rather headachy, 6k dimly obscured with sleeping draught. This is the aftermath (what does that mean?—Trench, whom I open idly apparently says nothing1) of Orlando. Yes, yes, since I wrote here I have become two inches 6k a half higher in the public view. I think I may say that I am now among the well known writers. I had tea with Lady Cunard—might have

lunched or dined any day.2 I found her in a little cap telephoning. It was not her atmosphere—this of solitary talk. She is too shrewd to expand, & needs society to make her rash & random which is her point. Ridiculous little parrokeet faced woman; but not quite sufficiently ridiculous. I kept wishing for superlatives: could not get the illusion to flap its wings. Flunkeys, yes; but a little drab & friendly. Marble floors, yes; but no glamour; no tune strumming, for me at least. And the two of us sitting there had almost to be conventional & flat—reminds me of Sir Thomas Browne—the greatest book of our times—said a little flatly by a woman of business, to me who don't believe in that kind of thing unless launched with champagne & garlands. Then in came Lord Donegall, a glib Irish youth, dark sallow slick, on the Press.3 Dont they treat you like a dog? I said. "No, not at all" he replied, astonished that a marquis could be treated like a dog by anyone. And then we went up & up to see pictures on stairs in ballrooms & finally to Lady C's bedroom, hung entirely with flower pieces. The bed has its triangular canopy of rose red silk; the windows, looking on the square, are hung with green brocade. Her poudreuse—like mine only painted & gilt stood open with gold brushes looking glasses, & there on her gold slippers were neatly laid gold stockings. All this paraphernalia for one stringy old hop o' my thumb. She set the two great musical boxes playing & I said did she lie in bed 6k listen to them? But no. She has nothing fantastic in that way about her. Money is important. She told me rather sordid stories of Lady Sackville never visiting her without fobbing something off on her—now a bust, worth £5, for which she paid £100; now a brass knocker. "And then her talk—I didn't care for it. . ." Somehow I saw into these sordid commonplace talks, & could not sprinkle the air with gold dust easily. But no doubt she has her acuity, her sharp peck at life; only how adorable, I thought, as I tiptoed home in my tight shoes, in the fog, in the chill, could one open one of these doors that I still open so venturously, & find a live interesting real person, a Nessa, a Duncan, a Roger. Some one new, whose mind would begin vibrating. Coarse & usual & dull these Cunards & Colefaxes are—for all their astonishing competence in the commerce of life.
And I cannot think what to 'write next'. I mean the situation is, this

Orlando is of course a very quick brilliant book. Yes, but I did not try to explore. And must I always explore? Yes I think so still. Because my reaction is not the usual. Nor can I even after all these years' run it off lightly. Orlando taught me how to write a direct sentence; taught me continuity & narrative, 6k how to keep the realities at bay. But I purposely avoided of course any other difficulty. I never got down to my depths 6k made shapes square up, as I did in The Lighthouse.
Well but Orlando was the outcome of a perfectly definite, indeed overmastering impulse. I want fun. I want fantasy. I want (6k this was serious) to give things their caricature value. And still this mood hangs'" about me. I want to write a history, say of Newnham or the womans movement, in the same vein. The vein is deep in me—at least sparkling, urgent. But is it not stimulated by applause? over stimulated? My notion is that there are offices to be discharged by talent for the relief of genius: meaning that one has the play side; the gift when it is mere gift, unapplied gift; 6k the gift when it is serious, going to business. And one relieves the other.
Yes, but The Moths? That was to be an abstract mystical eyeless book: a playpoem. And there may be affectation in being too mystical, too abstract; saying Nessa 6k Roger 6k Duncan 6k Ethel Sands admire that: it is the uncompromising side of me; therefore I had better win their approval—
Again, one reviewer days that I have come to a crisis in the matter of style: it is now so fluent 6k fluid that it runs through the mind like water.
That disease began in The Lighthouse. The first part came fluid—how I wrote 6k wrote!
Shall I now check 6k consolidate, more in the Dalloway Jacob's Room style?
I rather think the upshot will be books that relieve other books: a variety of styles 6k subjects: for after all, that is my temperament, I think: to be very little persuaded of the truth of anything—what I say, what people say—always to follow, blindly instinctively with a sense of leaping over a precipice—the call of—the call of— now, if I write The Moths I must come to terms with these mystical feelings.
Desmond destroyed our Saturday walk; he is now mouldy 6k to me depressing. He is perfectly reasonable 6k charming. Nothing surprises, nothing shocks him. He has been through it all one feels. He has come out rolled, smoothed, rather sodden rather creased 6k jumbled, like a man who has sat up all night in a third class railway carriage. His fingers are stained yellow with cigarettes. One tooth in the lower jaw is missing. His hair is dank. His eye more than ever dubious. He has a hole in his blue sock. Yet

he is resolute & determined—thats what I find so depressing. He seems to be sure that it is his view that is the right one; ours vagaries, deviations. And if his view is the right one, God knows there is nothing to live for: not a greasy biscuit. And the egotism of men surprises & shocks me even now. Is there a woman of my acquaintance who could sit in my arm chair from 3 to 6.30 without the semblance ofa suspicion that I may be busy, or tired, or bored; & so sitting could talk, grumbling & grudging, of her difficulties, worries; then eat chocolates, then read a book, & go at last, apparently self-complacent & wrapped in a kind of blubber of misty self satisfaction? Not the girls at Newnham or Girton. They are far too spry; far too disciplined. None of that self-confidence is their lot.
"We paid for our dinner at the Lion. Miss Thomas & Miss-------? were
relieved, not to have to part with quite so many half crowns. And they showed us the chocolate coloured corridors of Girton, like convent cells; —
And there was the meeting in Mr Williams Ellises studio—a vast hall in Ebury street, with ostentatiously ragged chair covers.4 Our raggedness, as a profession, was not ostentatious alas; it is part of our souls; a dowdi-ness that is not ragged, however; a meticulous respectability which is not my working state; for then I am, I think, almost picturesque. As a crowd together we achieve only dinginess & something egotistic & unreserved in our faces; as for old Garnett, I felt surely someone ought to put that surly shaggy unkempt old monstrosity (certainly his nails want cutting & his coat is matted with mud & burrs) in the lethal chamber. D[itt]o of his mistress: the top half Esquimaux, the bottom Maytime in Hampstead— sprigged muslin, sandals.5 Vita as usual like a lamp or torch in all this petty bourgeoisdom; a tribute to the breeding of the Sackvilles, for without care of her clothes she appears among them (in all the sanity 6k strength of a well made body) like a lampost, straight, glowing. None of us have that; or know not how to carry it.
Poor Rose Macaulay—a mere chit; a wafer—& so on to the Hendersons in Hampstead, where my spleen & Frankie's were twin spleens: poor Frankie however kept his rattle 6k clapper going, hour after hour, sounding alone, while I sank in a tolerable arm chair 6k could say nothing;

though Mrs Enfield who has read the whole of Balzac made advances with Proust.6 Faith, I think, saw in this languor, bad manners 6k conceit. She saw us despising her home 6k husband. She despised them herself. And she went to bed saying something bitter to Hubert, 6k looked back into the drawing room, wondering why all the colours were wrong. But then next morning there are the children at breakfast 6k she recovers somewhat but has to speak severely about Mrs Maypole, the hired help (10/- a night) who dropped the plates, 6k left Mr Birrell holding the ladle; 6k the ice was salt. Then she takes up Orlando 6k says, to Hubert, "This is a greatly over rated book— It is far far worse than The Lighthouse ...' at the same time, 'What exciting lives these people lead! Bloomsbury..."
Thursday 8 November
Just to solace myself before correcting Hardy 6k Gissing,7 I will note that we went to Karin's party last night. The truth is the stimulus is too brisk; one rattles; 6k only a shout can be heard, 6k one must stand; 6k one gets caught, like a bramble on a river by some branch; 6k hooked up out of the eddy. An emerald green Russian talked to me of seals 6k then gave me a card; I am to lecture 4 times a week for 8 weeks in America—oh yes—6k she will arrange most advantageous terms. But won't mention money in a drawing room: so we lapse upon seals again, or Ann [Stephen]'s rabbit—a chinchilla animal lying languidly extended in the midst of the rumpus, exquisite, alien. Ethel Sands, fanning my vanity into a glow: yet she was downright the other night that Orlando isn't a patch on Lighthouse, with talk of luncheon parties where nothing is talked about but 6kc. 6kc.
Janet 6k Angus to dinner.8 The young man who wants a job is not amiable; poor old Angus cuts up a little rough, 6k launches into anxious worried explanations about his play. He will never now break through that chrysalis core of gentlemanly reserve, caution, good manners which shells him in. I think he will meditate more 6k more upon the glories of

being a Davidson. Yet he has his scallywag side, the poor man, dancing & dining, which is to his credit. Janet in comparison seemed rapid, decided & lustrous, all in gold for Karin's party with Madge's gold necklace, & something very like Madge now & then; but tempered with the Vaughan decision. She is an attractive woman; competent; disinterested, taking blood tests all day to solve some abstract problem.
. . . think it Saturday 10 November
This unexampled fluency here is due to the fact that I should be reading Miss Jewsbury,9 answering letters (Lady Cunard to dine alone with George Moore) or correcting Hardy & Gissing. All these tasks are unworthy the sacred morning hours. Phrase tossing can only be done then; so I toss them privately here, feeling relieved not to be making money, once in a while. Shall I say that Bennett in the Ev[ening] Standard hurt me less than Squire in the Observer?10 Not at all, I think;—an odd thing, though, how I am praised & abused: & what a sting I am in the flanks of Squires & Bennetts.
What is more interesting—& Lord knows this is true—I am speaking coolly & faithfully—is the trial yesterday at Bow Street.11 We were all packed in by 10.30: the door at the top ofthe court opened; in stepped the debonair distinguished magistrate; we all rose; he bowed; took his seat under the lion & the unicorn, & then proceeded. Something like a Harley St. specialist investigating a case. All black & white, tie pin, clean shaven,

wax coloured, & carved, in that light, like ivory. He was ironical at first: raised his eyebrows & shrugged. Later I was impressed by the reason of the law, its astuteness, its formality. Here have we evolved a very remarkable fence between us & barbarity; something commonly recognised; half humbug & ceremony therefore—when they pulled out calf bound books & read old phrases I thought this; & the bowing & scraping made me think it; but in these banks runs a live stream. What is obscenity? What is literature? What is the difference between the subject & the treatment? In what cases is evidence allowable? This last, to my relief, was decided against us: we could not be called as experts in obscenity, only in art. So Desmond who had got under the palanquin where he looked too indifferent, too calm, too completely at his ease to be natural, was only asked his qualifications & then, not allowed to answer the obscene question, was dismissed. In the hall I talked to Lady Troubridge (who used to sculpt & last time we met was a tea party, as children, in Montpelier Sqre) & John— John lemon yellow, tough, stringy, exacerbated.12 Their costs run into 4 figures she said. And Leonard thinks this heralds a subscription. After lunch we heard an hour more, & then the magistrate, increasingly deliberate & courteous, said he would read the book again & give judgment next Friday at two, [on] the pale tepid vapid book which lay damp & slab all about the court. And I lost my little Roman brooch, & that is the end of this great day, so far. A curious brown top lighted scene; very stuffy; policemen at the doors; matrons passing through. An atmosphere quite decent & formal, of adult people.
Sunday 25 November
Leonard's 48th birthday. We were at Rodmell, where all has fallen into our hands, rapidly, unexpectedly: on top of the field we get a cottage, & Percy [Bartholomew] is 'our man'. Mrs Percy has inherited from that strange relationship of hers—I suspect her of being the illegitimate child of a circus manager—they travelled—she never speaks of her family— her father died alone—her Auntie left jewels 6k clothes—she has inherited £330 & some odd shillings. She has bought a set of big white teeth; & now thinks of a gramophone or a wireless set.

I took Essex & Eth (Lytton's) down to read, & Lord forgive me!— find it a poor book.13 I have not finished it; & am keeping it to see if my [text ends]
Wednesday 28 November
1928 Father's birthday. He would have been 1832 96, yes, today; & could
have been 96, like other people one has known; but mercifully was not. His life would have entirely ended mine. What would have happened? No writing, no books;—inconceivable. I used to think of him & mother daily; but writing The Lighthouse, laid them in my mind. And now he comes back sometimes, but differently. (I believe this to be true—that I was obsessed by them both, unhealthily; & writing of them was a necessary act.) He comes back now more as a contemporary. I must read him some day. I wonder if I can feel again, I hear his voice, I know this by heart?
Last night was one of our evenings—apparently successful; Adrian, Hope, Christa, Clive, Raymond, Bunny, Lytton, Vita 6k Valery towards the end: & Elizabeth Ponsonby.14 People enjoyed it. Perhaps I didnt; perhaps I did. Half way through Lytton vanished (he lodges upstairs) brayed out of the room by Clive's vociferation, L. thinks. Clive makes it all very strident, gaslit, band played. I marked a queer change in my feeling when Lytton went. At other times I have felt his silence disapproving; have moderated my folly under it, & tried to keep him from going. But now that man writes Elizabeth & Essex; I kept thinking: well, if he can palm that off on us after years of effort—that lively superficial meretricious book—he can go or stay as he likes. I feel no bite in his disapproval. And though one of my vile vices is jealousy, of other writers' fame, though I am (& I think we all are) secretly pleased to find Lytton's

book a bad one, I also feel depressed. If I were to analyse, the truth is I think that the pleasure is mean, & therefore not deep or satisfying; one would, in the depths, have got real pleasure, though superficial pain, had E & E been a masterpiece. Oh yes, I should—for I have a mind that feeds perfectly dispassionately & apart from my vanities & jealousies upon literature; & that would have taken a masterpiece to itself. Mixed last night with my feeling was some curious personal dissatisfaction: that Lytton whom I loved & love should write like that. It is a reflection on my own taste. It is so feeble, so shallow; & yet Lytton in himself is neither. So one next accuses the public; & then the Carringtons & the young men. And one furbishes up a cloistered secluded invalidish Lytton whipping the flanks of the language & putting it to this foaming gallop, when the poor beast is all spavins & sores. And Dadie & Pernel & Janie Bussy & Dorothy [Bussy] all declared with emotion that this book was his best!
So the days pass, & I ask myself sometimes whether one is not hypnotised, as a child by a silver globe, by life; & whether this is living. Its very quick, bright, exciting. But superficial perhaps. I should like to take the globe in my hands 6k feel it quietly, round, smooth, heavy. 6k so hold it, day after day. I will read Proust I think. I will go backwards 6k forwards.
As for my next book, I am going to hold myself from writing till I have it impending in me: grown heavy in my mind like a ripe pear; pendant, gravid, asking to be cut or it will fall. The Moths still haunts me, coming, as they always do, unbidden, between tea 6k dinner, while L. plays the gramophone. I shape a page or two; 6k make myself stop. Indeed I am up against some difficulties. Fame to begin with. Orlando has done very well. Now I could go on writing like that—the tug 6k suck are at me to do it. People say this was so spontaneous, so natural. And I would like to keep those qualities if I could without losing the others. But those qualities were largely the result of ignoring the others. They came of writing exteriorly; 6k if I dig, must I not lose them? And what is my own position towards the inner 6k the outer? I think a kind of ease 6k dash are good;— yes: I think even externality is good; some combination of them ought to be possible. The idea has come to me that what I want now to do is to saturate every atom. I mean to eliminate all waste, deadness, superfluity: to give the moment whole; whatever it includes. Say that the moment is a combination of thought; sensation; the voice of the sea. Waste, deadness, come from the inclusion of things that dont belong to the moment; this appalling narrative business ofthe realist: getting on from lunch to dinner: it is false, unreal, merely conventional. Why admit any thing to literature

that is not poetry—by which I mean saturated? Is that not my grudge against novel[ist]s—that they select nothing? The poets succeeding by simplifying: practically everything is left out. I want to put practically everything in; yet to saturate. That is what I want to do in The Moths. It must include nonsense, fact, sordidity: but made transparent. I think I must read Ibsen & Shakespeare & Racine. And I will write something about them; for that is the best spur, my mind being what it is; then I read with fury & exactness; otherwise I slip & skip: I am a lazy reader. But no: I am surprised & a little disquieted by the remorseless severity of my mind: that it never stops reading 6k writing; makes me write on Geraldine Jewsbury, on Hardy, on Women—is too professional, too little any longer a dreamy amateur.
Saturday 8 December
Here is a note barely dashed off (io to one—just finished, very provisionally "Phases of Fiction") after Christabel MacClaren; & her 'winkle' party, as I call it, the other night. I mean she picked me out with a pin— about Lesbianism, & Dotty—(she is not one). My note was about her attitude to men; the adoring, flattering woman's attitude, which I so seldom see so purely. Like a flame leaping up. Clive "the most honourable of men"—yes but said with a devoutness, a radiancy, that made me laugh. Is this the 'natural' attitude between the sexes? What Clive has, the other way round for women? So cordial, so appreciative; I could hear it kindling her voice when she said "The men were bathing or writing letters or talking"—that was at Sherfield.1 The men, good delightful creatures, were so engaged while that wretched furtive creature D. pursued me. And I can see man after man, Desmond, Clive 6kc, Wells, Shaw, warming his hands at this natural warmth, & expanding. It amused me. The other thought I had was about the limits of luxury: how far can the human soul stretch into rugs & rooms; at what point they suffocate its force. I have seen several rich people this autumn; & thought them, perhaps, dulled, coarsened by it: Lady Cunard; two days ago Mrs Bowen & Mrs Grenfell at Lydia's.2

Sunday 9 December
These reflections are written on a bitter cold evening to get the taste of a sentence into my mouth again. Angelica came this morning, & every time I lifted my pen she,—heavenly little creature that she is, demure, witty fantastic, neatly tipped the cup upside down; like a fool I went on trying to write, & only gave up when I was in a state of exasperation, not with her, but with my book: I was beginning a new beginning to Fiction. Now it is after tea; Angus will be coming to see Leonard about a character; & I am escaped, & can't be got at; 6k shall read Troilus & Cressida (Chaucer) till dinner. I have again seen too many people, without much intensity. Lydia's foolish tea party; & the Bagenals' lunch, & Christa; & then Long Barn, & being driven up by Dotty; "I cant say I understand Harold—I can't really say I do"—Then Vita, making a sacrifice of her quiet evening, drove up to London & heard her broadcast & went back with her, to save me the solitary drive. This worried me, rather: for whom would I give up this evening? 6k then Dotty with her pecking exacting ways "Please dear put the window up—put the window down" makes Vita seem to me pathetically gentle & kind. But none of this matters very much I agree, & Lord helping, I shall work all this week—save for the evenings. It is so cold my back is cold now, while the fire roasts my feet; fire is striking & many fire engines have rushed down Southampton Row. The King is dragging along, & the shop assistants are in fear lest they shall lose their Christmas bonus.3 Christmas impends. And we shall spend it alone here, I think, & go to Rodmell afterwards & plan a new room, with Kennedy. And then to Berlin we say. Meanwhile Nessa 6k I give our Tuesday evenings, & too many people press to come.
But why I ask "see" people? Whats the point? These isolated occasions which come so often. May I come & see you? And what they get, or I get, save the sense of a slide passing on a screen, I cant say.
Tuesday 18 December
Here I should be pegging away at Fiction; rather an interesting little book I think; but I cannot get my mind down on to it, like a bird of prey firmly attached. I was switched off to write a eulogy of Lady Strachey, burnt yesterday with a bunch of our red 6k white carnations on top of her.4

It is odd how little her death means to me—for this reason. About a year ago she was said to be dying; & at once (Adrian told me) I made up my usual visualisation; felt the whole emotion of Lady Strachey's passing— her memories & so on—that night; & then she did not die; & now when she does die, not a vision, not an emotion comes my way. These little tricks of psychology amuse me.
L. has just been in to consult about a 3rd edition of Orlando. This has been ordered; we have sold over 6000 copies; & sales are still amazingly brisk—150 today for instance; most days between 50 & 60; always to my surprise. Will they stop or go on? Anyhow my room is secure. For the first time since I married 1912—1928—16 years—I have been spending money. The spending muscle does not work naturally yet. I feel guilty; put off buying, when I know that I should buy; & yet have an agreeable luxurious sense of coins in my pocket beyond my weekly 13/- which was always running out, or being encroached upon. Yesterday I spent 15/- on a steel brooch. I spent £3 on a mother of pearl necklace—& I haven't bought a jewel for 20 years perhaps! I have carpeted the dining room— & so on. I think one's soul is the better for this lubrication; & I am going to spend freely, & then write, & so keep my brain on the boil. All this money making originated in a spasm of black despair one night at Rodmell 2 years ago.5 I was tossing up & down on those awful waves: when I said that I could find a way out. (For part of my misery was the perpetual limitation of everything; no chairs, or beds, no comfort, no beauty; & no freedom to move: all of which I determined there & then to win). And so came, with some argument, even tears one night (& how seldom I have ever cried!) to an agreement with Leonard about sharing money after a certain sum; & then opened a bank account; & now, at the lowest shall have £200 to put there on Jan. 1st. The important thing is to spend freely, without fuss or anxiety; & to trust to one's power of making more— Indeed, I cannot at this moment very seriously doubt that I shall earn more, this next 5 years, than ever before.
But to return to Max Beerbohm. I met him at Ethel's the other night.6 As I came in a thick set old man (such was my impression) rose, & I was introduced. No freakishness, no fancy about him. His face is solidified; has a thick moustache; a red veined skin, heavy lines; but then his eyes are perfectly round, very large, & sky blue. His eyes become dreamy & merry when the rest of him is well groomed & decorous in the extreme.

He is brushed, neat, urbane. Halfway through dinner he turned to me & we began a 'nice', interesting, flattering, charming kind of talk; he told me how he had read an article on Addison at Bognor during the war; when literature seemed extinct; & there was his own name. I daresay V.W. catches your eye as M.B. does mine. And nothing has encouraged me more. So I said, as I think, that he is immortal. In a small way, he said; but with complacency. Like a jewel which is hard & flawless, yet always changing. A charming image he said, very kind, approving, & what half flattered half saddened me, equal. Am I on that level? Virginia Woolf says—V.W. thinks—how do you write? & so on: I was one of his colleagues & fellows in the art of writing; but not I hoped quite so old. Anyhow he asked me how I wrote. For he hacks every step with his pen, & therefore never alters. He thought I wrote like this. I told him I had to cut out great chunks. I wish you would send them to me, he said; simply; Indeed, he was nothing if not kind; but looked long & steadily. Looked at Lord David [Cecil]—that queer painters look, so matching, so considering apart from human intent; yet with him not entirely. After dinner, he leant on the mantelpiece & Maurice Baring & I flittered round him like a pair of butterflies, praising, laughing, extravagant. And he said he was so pleased by the praise of intelligent people like ourselves. But always he had to be led off to talk politely to this person & that; finally disappeared, very dignified, very discreet in his white waistcoat, pressing my hand in his plump firm one long; & saying what a pleasure &c. I own that I dont find much difference between the great & ourselves—indeed they are like us: I mean they dont have the frills & furbelows ofthe small; come to terms quickly & simply. But we got, of course, very little way. He talked of Hardy, & said he couldnt bear Jude the Obscure: thought it falsified life, for there is really more happiness than sorrow in life, & Hardy tries to prove the opposite. And his writing is so bad. Then I ran down—but he reads my essays & knows this—Belloc.7 M.B. said that Belloc, one must remember, poured out ten books a year on history poetry &c. He was one of those full unequal people who were never perfect, as he, M.B., might be called perfect in a small way. But he was glad I didnt like him. Charles Lamb had the most beautiful things in him & then he spoilt them. He had never read a book except Pendennis & Tess of the d'Urbervilles till he left Oxford. And now at last, at Rapallo, he reads. He is taking back Elizabeth & Orlando (pronounced in the French way) to read; treats he looks forward to.

Among others were present. . . Mrs Hammersley, Lord David, Hutchinsons, &c.8
And we dined last night with the Hutchinsons & met George Moor[e] —like an old silver coin now, so white so smooth; with his little flipper hands, like a walruses; & his chubby cheeks, & little knees—yet always saying the thing that comes into his head; fresh, juvenile almost for that reason; & very shrewd. Gave a description of Riceyman Steps9—the ferns covered in dust, the man with cancer marrying the woman with fits— Not what one calls a distinguished mind—& what a subject to choose! It seems as if he attaches much importance to subject. He was always praising or altering ways of treating stories. He is writing some Greek novel now, dictating to a charming lady, who has every virtue, save that she is not forthcoming & therefore will not marry. He dictates, & this gives him something to bite upon: then he re-dictates. He never writes. There are no mss of his in existence. Perhaps the dictated style is a true account of his style & H[enry]. J[ames]'s. & accounts for their fluidity, their verbosity.10 And what it comes to is that the great are very simple; quick to come to terms with; reserved; & dont pay any attention to other peoples books (Moore throws scorn on them all—Shaw—a shriek of vulgarity—poisoned with vulgarity—never wrote a good sentence in his life—Wells—I spare myself Wells—& Galsworthy—) & live in an atmosphere very serene, bright, & fenced oft": for all that they are more to the point than ordinary people; go to the heart of things directly. Moore toddled off & got quickly into a cab, Jack said, for all his look of an old silver coin.

1929
Friday 4 January
How odd to think that I have given the world something that the world enjoys—I refer to the Manchester Guardian—Orlando is recognised for the masterpiece that it is. The Times does not mention Nessa's pictures.1 Yet, she said last night, I have spent a long time over one of them. Then I think to myself, So I have something, instead of children, 6k fall comparing our lives. I note my own withdrawal from those desires; my absorption in what I call, inaccurately, ideas: this vision.
We saw Koteliansky on Christmas day. Rather dryer & yellower in the cheeks, like an orange that is old. He was in his shirt sleeves. He had been washing up his Christmas dinner, which was "No, not a very good one . . . Come in Come in". This was Katherine's room he said. It is poverty stricken, tidy, clean—a bed, a table. It looks over back gardens to the trees of Regent's Park. We went straight into the old abuse of Murry; went back ten years, to Richmond; & those long visits; those difficult emphatic ways. He is, one says, the same. Very poor, as definite as ever. Still talking about Lawrence; a very very good writer but his last book DISGUSTING. You must read Counterpoint.2 Why? Because

he is a seerious man, a cultivated man. And it is typical of the age. It is a painful book a horrid book but it is that. Still the same seriousness, & concentration upon say 5 objects which he has been staring at these 40 years. Still he gnaws the bone of Katherine & Murry. And all the time some emotion was working in him. He was glad we had come. What could he give us? He gave me a red wooden box, a Russian toy, & stuffed it full of his Russian cigarettes. His voice quivered now & then. He looked at me with emotion. All the linoleum was shining, where he had cleaned it, & he had painted the woodwork with two sorts of Reckitt's blue: so that it shone very bright. He had painted it over 6k over. There he lives, how heaven knows. People will no longer buy his translations. His dog (a pure Jewish dog) is dead.
Now is life very solid, or very shifting? I am haunted by the two contradictions. This has gone on for ever: will last forever; goes down to the bottom ofthe world—this moment I stand on. Also it is transitory, flying, diaphanous. I shall pass like a cloud on the waves. Perhaps it may be that though we change; one flying after another, so quick so quick, yet we are somehow successive, & continuous—we human beings; & show the light through. But what is the light? I am impressed by the transitoriness of human life to such an extent that I am often saying a farewell—after dining with Roger for instance; or reckoning how many more times I shall see Nessa.
Before Christmas Vita Sackville-West had gone to join her husband Harold Nicolson for a ten-week stay in Berlin, where he was Counsellor at the British Embassy. This provided the impulse for the Woolfs to visit Berlin; on 16 January they travelled overnight by Harwich and the Hook of Holland, and stayed at the Prinz Albrecht Hotel, where they were joined on 18 January by Vanessa and Quentin Bell and Duncan Grant who were making a tour of picture galleries in Germany and Austria. They all spent what Vanessa termed 'a very rackety' week in Berlin in the company ofthe Nicolsons, and the Woolfs returned the way they had come on 21 January; VW reach home in a state of collapse, and for the next six weeks led a virtually invalid life.
Thursday 28 March
It is a disgrace indeed; no diary has been left so late in the year. The truth was that we went to Berlin on the 16th of January, & then I was in bed for three weeks afterwards, & then could not write; perhaps for another three, & have spent my energy since in one of my excited outbursts of

composition—writing what I made up in bed, a final version of Women & Fiction.1
And as usual, I am bored by narrative. I want only to say how I met Nessa in Tottenham Court Road this afternoon, both of us sunk fathoms deep in that wash of reflection in which we both swim about. She will be gone on Wednesday for 4 months. It is queer how instead of drawing apart, life draws us together. But I was thinking a thousand things as I carried my teapot, gramophone records & stockings under my arm. It is one of those days that I called 'potent' when we lived in Richmond.
Perhaps I ought not to go on repeating what I have always said about the spring. One ought perhaps to be forever finding new things to say, since life draws on. One ought to invent a fine narrative style. Certainly there are many new ideas always forming in my head. For one, that I am going to enter a nunnery these next months; & let myself down into my mind; Bloomsbury being done with. I am going to face certain things. It is going to be a time of adventure & attack, rather lonely 6k painful I think. But solitude will be good for a new book. Of course, I shall make friends. I shall be external outwardly. I shall buy some good clothes 6k go out into new houses. All the time I shall attack this angular shape in my mind. I think the Moths (if that is what I shall call it) will be very sharply cornered. I am not satisfied though with the frame. There is this sudden fertility which may be mere fluency. In old days books were so many sentences absolutely struck with an axe out of crystal: 6k now my mind is so impatient, so quick, in some ways so desperate.
Old age is withering us; Clive, Sibyl, Francis—all wrinkled 6k dusty; going over the hoops, along the track. Only in myself, I say, forever bubbles this impetuous torrent. So that even if I see ugliness in the glass, I think, very well, inwardly I am more full of shape 6k colour than ever. I think I am bolder as a writer. I am alarmed by my own cruelty with my friends. Clive, I say, is intolerably dull. Francis is a runaway milk lorry.
I feel on the verge of some strenuous adventure: yes; as if this spring day were the hatching; the portal; the opening through which I shall go upon this experience. So when I wake early, I brace myself out of my terrors by saying that I shall need great courage: after all, I say, I made £1000 all from willing it early one morning. No more poverty I said; 6k poverty has ceased. I am summoning Philcox next week to plan a room—

I have money to build it, money to furnish it. And we have the new car, & we can drive to Edinburgh in June if we like, & go to Cassis.2
The new year was threatened with a pumping machine, making this studio a trial; for it pumped every 25 minutes. Now for a fortnight it has not pumped. Am I saved? Now it is so quiet that I only hear sparrows; & a voice singing in the hotel. A perfect room for me. Nessa has taken a studio & will let 37, thus ending, for ever I suppose, her Gordon Square life.3 How much I admire this handling of life as if it were a thing one could throw about; this handling of circumstance. Angelica will go to school. I have now many admiring letters to answer. Simpkins said today that many great publishers would be proud to have our list. In io years we shall be rather celebrated. At anyrate, without any trouble to write well, as there should have been, I have once more launched this diary.
Saturday 13 April
Habits gradually change the face of ones life as time changes one's physical face; & one does not know it. Here am I using this studio to sit in, & with my diary to write down here; almost always after tea I retire here. And then I never print now or address envelopes. So perhaps habit will snuff out this diary one day.
I am sordidly debating within myself the question of Nelly; the perennial question. It is an absurdity, how much time L. & I have wasted in talking about servants. And it can never be done with because the fault lies in the system. How can an uneducated woman let herself in, alone, into our lives? —what happens is that she becomes a mongrel; & has no roots any where. I could put my theory into practice by getting a daily of a civilised kind, who had her baby in Kentish town; & treated me as an employer, not friend. Here is a fine rubbish heap left by our parents to be swept.
It is very quiet & very cold. I walked Pinka through the Saturday streets this afternoon & was woken to the fact that it is April by a primrose on the pavement. I had been thinking I was on one of my January walks, with lights lit at 3.30 in peoples bedrooms. Rodmell was impracticable because of the cold; & until I have a room, I cannot go there meaning to work.

We always do mean to work.
I have just agreed to do another 4 articles for Mrs Van Doren, because she has raised her price to £50 an article—so that, whatever the cost, I can have my new room.1 And all this money is changing my habits. I'm not sure it is not the memorable fact about this spring—for the ' 928 first time since 1912—16 years that is—I am able to look say at blue I9'2 lustre cups in a shop & decide, well why not buy them? But they I(j cost £6 ... But then I am making over £1000 a year. I can make as much as I want. This little colloquy still takes place before I can unbend my old penurious muscles. But it is always better to buy than not to buy I think.
Hugh Walpole was here the other day, from 4.30 to 7.15 alone, over the fire. The same uneasy talk as usual; brisk & breezy, hating war; & then this morbid egotism & desire to scratch the same place over & over again—his own defects as a writer & how to remedy them, what they spring from; all mixed up with his normal, & usual sense of being prosperous & admired—from which, as he admits when I ask him, he gets great pleasure. He starts indeed to protest that he gives pleasure, does good, but can't bring that out in my presence; which is why he seeks my presence —a scratching stone to rid him ofthe world's mud. He protests too much. On the other hand, I like these bustling vigour[ous] characters: I like talk of Russia, & war & great doings & famous people— If I don't see them I romanticise them.
Leonard is upstairs finishing the Hogarth Press accounts. Yesterday he gave the three stall hands a bonus: Mrs C. £25; Belcher £20; Kennedy £20.2 They sent up a bunch of roses later in the day. For the first time we have made over £400 profit. And 7 people now depend on us; & I think with pride that 7 people depend, largely, upon my hand writing on a sheet of paper. That is of course a great solace & pride to me. Its not scribbling; its keeping 7 people fed & housed: a great big man like Percy; a carrot faced woman like Cartwright; they live on my words. They will be feeding off Women & Fiction next year for which I predict some sale. It has considerable conviction. I think that the form, half talk half soliloquy allows me to get more onto the page than any how else. It made itself up & forced itself upon me (in this form—the thinking had been done & the

writing stiffly & unsatisfactorily 4 times before) as I lay in bed after Berlin. I used to make it up at such a rate that when I got pen & paper I was like a water bottle turned upside down. The writing was as quick as my hand could write; too quick, for I am now toiling to revise; but this way gives one freedom & lets one leap from back to back of one's thoughts.
Happily, for my health of soul, I am now very little noticed, & so can forget the fictitious self, for it is half so, which fame makes up for one: I can see my famous self tapering about the world. I am more comfortable when shut up, self-contained as now.
The great pleasure of money is to spend a pound—as on a dinner at Richmond—without accounting for it— I dined there with Vita. It was cold. We drove round the Park. I saw a man leading a large cat on a chain. I saw many odd parties in the hotel. How can they come here tonight, I said? There was the old woman gorged like a vulture. The woman with her foot cocked under the table at this ^ angle, all through dinner: the young spark in grey with the pink carnation; the two prominent-eyed daughters in velvet; & all kinds of emotions, of ridicule & interest crossing the vast room perpetually from one table to another. The waiters, I thought, are only here this one night; everything is unreal & will vanish. But it is going on precisely the same at this moment. Have you had a tiring day Miss-------? says Mrs-------leaning out to speak to her. Oh dreadfully tiring says Miss-------taking her seat at the table with the reserved
private bottle of soda water. And in complete desolation she waits for the courses to be brought.
Monday 29 April
And it is pouring. Oh this cold spring! Dry as a bone, though until today, but with never a blue sky. So that my red coat, which is like haws in winter, suits it. I heard the nightingale at Vita's a week or two ago— the one warm night. And we were cold at Rodmell last week, when we went down to see Philcox, who will build two rooms for £320, & take only two months. It was cold; but how silent, how safe from voices & talk! How I resented our coming back; & quickly changed into the social sphere of my soul; & went to lunch with Sibyl; & there had, for my pains, precisely six minutes of tolerable talk with Max Beerbohm. But dear me, how little talk with great men now disturbs me. Are we all chilling & freezing, & do we look into each others old faces as into the craters of the moon? (These I saw silver white & like the spots that are made by water dropping into plaster of paris through Vita's telescope the other day.) I

begin to think that youth is the only tolerable thing to look at; & am taking Judy to the Coliseum on Wednesday.3
I forgot to say that the pump has begun again & is grinding away at this moment. But I say I shall get used to it—certainly I shall.
This morning I began to revise Phases of Fiction, & with that done, I can see my way clear to a complete imaginative book.
Meanwhile, I am eddying quicker & quicker into the stream, into London: tomorrow Christabel; then Mauron's lecture & Mary & the Keynes' & the Eliots.4
Poor Tom—a true poet, I think; what they will call in a hundred years a man of genius: & this is his life. I stand for half an hour listening while he says that Vivien cant walk. Her legs have gone. But whats the matter? No one knows. And so she lies in bed—cant put a shoe on. And they have difficulties, humiliations, with servants. And after endless quibbling about visiting—which he cant do these 8 weeks, owing to moving house & 15 first cousins come to England, suddenly he appears overcome, moved, tragic, unhappy, broken down, because I offer to come to tea on Thursday. Oh but we dont dare ask our friends, he said. We have been deserted. Nobody has been to see us for weeks. Would you really come—all this way? to see us? Yes I said.5 But what a vision of misery, imagined, but real too. Vivien with her foot on a stool, in bed all day; Tom hurrying back lest she abuse him: this is our man of genius.— This is what I gathered yesterday morning on the telephone.
Sunday 12 May
Here, having just finished what I call the final revision of Women 6k Fiction so that L. can read it after tea, I stop: surfeited. And the pump, which I was so sanguine as to think ceased, begins again. About W. & F., I am not sure—a brilliant essay?—I daresay; it has much work in it, many opinions boiled down into a kind of jelly, which I have stained red as far as I can. But I am eager to be off—to write without any boundary coming

slick in ones eyes: here my public has been too close: facts; getting them malleable, easily yielding to each other.
A wet day, or we should be at Hampton Court with Roger & Mauron. And I am glad of the rain, because I have talked too much. We have seen too many people—Sydney Waterlow perhaps the most notable, as a resurrection. A desperate looking pompous sad respectable elderly man; worldly; but quivering as usual in his shell. Any pin pricks him in the unarmoured skin. I liked him. We met in the dark hall, glad of its darkness. We talked almost too easily, of Lucy Clifford buried with a service; & then his lancers & state at Bangkok—all to his liking. His importance very clear to him. At Oare he is nobody. And so he would like to go back to Bangkok & be important in the East for ever.1 He can seek the truth no more—has indeed seen through the search for truth, which was in him the search for power. He believes in nothing any more, he said, & is convinced now that nothing will ever change him— So, talking of something else for a moment, he suddenly burst out into a terrific peroration about Spengler; who has changed the world for him—made infinitely more difference than anybody—so fixed & stable & independent is he.2
Also we had a party: Roger a little old—to my mind he needs Nessa to fertilise & sweeten him. Some queer rancour often seems to exacerbate him. When his stomach heals his leg aches. And Plomer came—a little rigid, I fear; & too much ofa gentleman; & little Blunden, the very image of a London house sparrow, that pecks & cheeps & is starved & dirty.3 And Julian, to me a very satisfactory young man at present; full of ardour, yet clear, precise; & genial too—with all his apostolic fervour & abstrac-

tedness a good fellow, warm, kindly; much more apt to see the good than the bad. For example he thought poor little grey mouse Jenkins very nice & very intelligent & sat screwed up on the floor at her feet. He had been consoling Topsy all the afternoon. For Topsy & Peter have separated. Yes they have separated for ever, owing to her flirtatious ways.
Monday 13 May
How odd this is—here I am sitting at 3.10 with nothing much to do— nothing that I need do. I must take up printing again. But we have been to the Singers with the car—its clutch in trouble; & as we started, up came Saxon, on his holiday— Going to the Ring of course, & having a day off. For how many years has he done this—strange methodical character that he is. We dont meet for months, & take up the subject again. He took out his cheque book & said he thought the pattern was changed, with the same interest in that minute detail as he had 30 years ago. He has the same umbrella hanging by a hook on his arm; the same gold watch chain; & his pirouetting attitudes; & sprightly bird-like ways.
What then has life given you, I asked, (myself) looking at the Church at the top of Portland Street.4 Well, he is free to go to the Opera, to read Plato to play chess. And he will continue doing these things, as if they were the chosen things till he dies. There is a certain dignity in this steady doing of things which seem chosen. Yet—thus one always ends a comparison of lives—I wouldn't for the whole world live yours.
And at 4 I must change & wash & go to the Mauron lecture at Argyll House; & then to Molly & then to dine with Sibyl—which will, I hope finish this lap of my race. Did I say that I still think of life as a series of laps—& still take my fences dutifully & then enjoy nothingness? So if I dine with Sibyl I need not dine with Christabel. I have never got in the frame of mind which makes these fences negligible. Then we go to Rodmell for 6 days; & then home; & then to Cassis; & then home. & then Rodmell; & then the autumn; & then the winter— Oh this pump! I wish I could say I never notice it. Moreover, the idea has come to me that I ought now to be re-reading my own books, for our 'Collected Edition'. L. & Kennedy are working at a dust cover this moment. Shall I run away from my duty & the pump & go & see?5

The election draws near, & the Derby.61 will go upstairs & read Proust I think, since I am fabricating a few remarks on him for that cursed book —that stone that plunges me deeper & deeper in the water. The reason I dislike dining with Sibyl is that she exacts it: I am to give her a display of intimacy, which she cannot acquire, poor woman, for herself.
Wednesday i5 May
This is written, as many pages in the past used to be written, to try a
new pen; for I am vacillating—cant be sure to stick to the old pen any
more. And then every gold pen has some fatal draw-
I make a note here      back. Never have I met one without. And then one
,,          ,  ,        cant be sure till one's written a long screed. And then
whole of Matthew       one's ashamed to go back—& then one does—&
Arnold.                     then it all begins again, like Mathew Arnold's river,
or sea (brings in again &c &c).7
I went to Sibyl's dinner; but Heavens, how little real point there is to these meetings—save indeed that the food is good; & there is wine, & a certain atmosphere of luxury & hospitality. This, on the other hand, tends to drug one; one has been given something, for which one has to pay. And I don't like that feeling. The old white haired baby [George Moore] sat propped up in his high chair; his hair now white like flax, like silk; his cheeks tinted a childs pink; his eyes with their marble hardness; his boneless ineffective hands. For some reason, he paid me compliments, indeed referred to me as an authority on English; & even offered, which I daresay was kindly meant, though nothing has happened, to send me one of his
books.8
What did we discuss? Mostly himself & his books, I think; & how he had known various old dim figures, far away in the past. I told them about Lord Alfred's threat, 6k this launched him on stories about Robbie

Ross, & his own lawsuits.9 But he is a detached shrewd old man; without many illusions & not very dependent on anyone, I should say. He wanted to walk back to Ebury Street, but it was raining 6k they made him take a cab. He talked about Henry James, & a proof sheet which nobody could read; & he said that a sentence ought to form like a cloud at the end of the pen—dont you think so? he said to me. These little compliments were due to my Geraldine & Jane which he said      & references, was an admirable story & should be published as such. It had nothing to do with fact. And I rather think he will die soon—he has to have another operation;10 but in his detached way. I think these artists are slightly bored by all physical transactions. Let my body die, I can imagine him saying, so long as I can go on forming sentences at the end of my pen—& why not? Save that of course he says he enjoys the pleasures of the body. But that I rather doubt.
And I doubt too if Clive does. Clive is I fancy in bad odour everywhere at the moment, with his silly egotistic ways—writing to me to boast of a 'mystery', which it is clear that I am to impart; but I shant. He is like Lottie au fond; & Lottie by the way is dismissed; & is said to owe Karin £8 which she can't pay, & great scenes take place, poor Adrian, as I imagine, moping & glooming in discomfort alone; with Karin savage & violent & competent spasmodically, rushing out to pay bills & put her house i'n order in ten minutes when she has neglected it all these years: sordid & squalid it all is, 6k hardly gives me any pleasure, to tell the truth, these sufferings of my friends.
I am depressed. Brace has done it. The oval faced sallow man. They want to keep W. 6k F., which I like, till the spring, ek make P. of F. come out this autumn—a book I hate; 6k was, as I think, wrongly pressed to undertake.11 And then Roger wants to come to Rodmell, 6k I don't like

after my protests, to say no; & yet to have to talk ek talk—& then Philcox can't get my rooms done, all because of Durrant's long waiting.12 So my wheel is turning low. & do I like this pen or dont I? Such are my sorrows Mr Wesley, as the man said when the servant put on too many coals.
What Clive says is that he has a mystery; something he cant share; & this annoys me too; the sensation mongering, like Dotty; the desire to be talked of. Oh, I say, if only I could plunge my mind into the delights of pure imagination, & so get some pull on this horrid world of real life!
But I must some how wind up this account of flies in the eye & go up to dinner & try to think of some cause of pleasure with Leonard. Something cheerful. Oh but then I must grind on at Proust, I suppose; & then copy out passages. Never mind, I will try my new pen & see if that doesn't cheer me. Because clearly these miseries are very small trivial miseries, & fundamentally I am the happiest woman in all WC1. The happiest wife, the happiest writer, the most liked inhabitant, so I say, in Tavistock Square. When I count up my blessings, they must surely amount to more than my sorrows; even when I have all these flies in my eyes.
Well, what am I going to have for dinner? And I will hastily try my new pen on this last page, making it rapidly describe my complete renovation of domestic life—odd, I didn't do it before: that I order dinner no longer; but write it in a book & thus put glass between me & Nelly.
Oh & George [Duckworth] rang up this morning. A French couple who admire me: could I lunch: & my teeth he says, drop out, while I talk, while I eat; & they preferred Brighton to Penshurst.
Tuesday 28 May
It is an odd summer, this one, unexampled perhaps in our history. We are going off to Cassis on Tuesday for a week. This is a revolution. We have never been abroad so late in the year I think. The Election will be over. We shall be governed by a Tory or a Labour party—Tory, I suppose. For the benefit of posterity I may say that nobody pretends to know, with the exception of the candidates. They are all—even Hubert—confident.13 And I feel, rather oddly, that this is an important election. Walking down the King's Road with Sidney Waterlow the other night—having been to dine at his club off' a mahogany table surrounded by the portraits of statesmen—I had a cocktail, but no wine—& it was a thundery day—

Leonard had a headache—& we sat in the ladies reception room—a ducks egg coloured room with globes of light sending their light up, not down— very cool, smooth solid, something like sitting inside a shape of blanc mange—then said Sidney, feeling that something must be done, shall we go & see the Sangers? It was a thing that one ought to do. It would give them such pleasure. And he bought me 3 bunches of violets at the door from a woman who said it was her 40th wedding day: a tribute to my having once been asked in marriage by Sidney was it?— I held them in my hand all the evening, & we found the Sangers out; only a menial man came up from the basement. So we said we will call on the MacCarthys. And so it was that we walked along the King's Road, talking about the Election.14 Sidney said that human nature has improved. We are all becoming gentler & wiser. Even the dogs are. One never sees a dog fight now he said, & sure enough the big mongrel trotted across the road very peacefully to sniff at the door of a public house. There the story stops. For I dont think much happened at the MacCarthys. One had to talk. I noticed nothing, I think. The memorable things happen when there is a great space of silence all round them perhaps. I dont know.
Now about this book, The Moths. How am I to begin it? And what is it to be? I feel no great impulse; no fever; only a great pressure of difficulty. Why write it then? Why write at all? Every morning I write a little sketch, to amuse myself.15
I am not saying, I might say, that these sketches have any relevance. I am not trying to tell a story. Yet perhaps it might be done in that way. A mind thinking. They might be islands of light—islands in the stream that I am trying to convey: life itself going on. The current of the moths flying strongly this way. A lamp & a flower pot in the centre. The flower can always be changing. But there must be more unity between each scene than I can find at present. Autobiography it might be called. How am I to make one lap, or act, between the coming ofthe moths, more intense than another; if there are only scenes? One must get the sense that this is the beginning: this the middle; that the climax—when she opens the window & the moth comes in. I shall have the two different currents—the moths flying along; the flower upright in the centre; a perpetual crumbling 6k renewing ofthe plant. In its leaves she might see things happen. But who is she? I am very anxious that she should have no name. I dont want a

Lavinia or a Penelope: I want 'She'. But that becomes arty, Liberty, greenery yallery somehow: symbolic in loose robes. Of course I can make her think backwards & forwards; I can tell stories. But thats not it. Also I shall do away with exact place & time. Anything may be out of the window—a ship—a desert—London.
Friday 31 May
The oculist said to me this afternoon "Perhaps you're not as young as you were". This is the first time that has been said to me; & it seemed to me an astonishing statement. It means that one now seems to a stranger not a woman, but an elderly woman. Yet even so, though I felt wrinkled & aged for an hour, & put on a manner of great wisdom & toleration, buying a coat, even so, I forget it soon; & am 'a woman' again. Another light on my character or appearance— Coming up Southampton Row, a man snapped me 6k then said stop; 6k made me pay 6d for a silly little damp film, which I did not want; nor did I want to stay talking politics to a ferrety little rascal, having had little lunch. But my face marked me for his victim.
"We are winning" Nelly said at tea. I was shocked to think that we both desire the Labour party to win—why? partly that I dont want to be ruled by Nelly. I think to be ruled by Nelly 6k Lottie would be a disaster. It is dribbled out. Last night at Charleston we heard election results spoken very distinctly in the drawing room. Driving home through Lewes there was not a single light downstairs. No one was even listening in. The streets were perfectly empty. One man was pumpshipping against the station wall. I had imagined a crowd, flares, shouts, white sheets—only three black cats, out on business with the mice. So we shall be ruled by labour.16
We went down to Worthing to see Leonard's mother, laid like an old rose—rather lovely this time—in a narrow room; with the sea opposite. I watched the porpoises, 6k some reflections of people walking on the beach. And she cried; 6k was very dismal; 6k then rambled off about Caterham 50 years ago; 6k the Stannards, 6k how Herbert had rolled all the way down stairs, 6k drank so much milk that people were astonished. Nothing of life, as we see it, remains to her—only this curious lit up page

of the past, which she turns over 6k over lying in bed; 6k cant read or sleep, yet anxiously demands, does Leonard think she will get well? We had been saying driving down that one should take poison. She has every reason; 6k yet demands more life, more life, at 78. She quarrels; she cant walk; she is alone; she is looked after by nurses; lives in an hotel, but demands more life, more life. One odd thing she said was that she had slept with a governess as a child who had given her a terrible disease, 6k been expelled from Holland on that account. I fancy she had never told anyone this; it was her offering of intimacy to us; a thanksgiving perhaps for our having come. I was moved by her; could hardly speak. I suppose human nature, so emotional, so irrational, so instinctive, as it is in her, but not in me, has this beauty; this what they call 'elemental' quality. One may get it too, when one is 76. One may lie sobbing, 6k yet cry does doctor think I shall recover? One will not perhaps go to the writing table 6k write that simple 6k profound paper upon suicide which I see myself leaving for my friends. What a day it was—the sea flowing in 6k out of the bays, all the way, like the Adriatic, or Pacific; 6k the sand yellow; 6k the boats steaming along; 6k behind the downs like long waves, gently extending themselves, to break very quickly; smooth 6k sloping like the waves. Even bungalows are all burnt up 6k made part of this beauty; made of vapour not zinc. We voted at Rodmell. I saw a white gloved lady helping an old farm couple out of her Daimler. We have bought a motor lawn mower. I liked Francis last night. He is so abundant 6k fertile, so generous 6k warm hearted A most divine man—a man I adore—these phrases recur. And then he amused me with his imitation of Esther talking like Macaulay [unexplained], When they read the results he was always talking so loud: 6k had to stop short. We called in on Long Barn 6k left Pinker, 6k here we are again after one of these little journeys which seem to have last[ed] 600 years. Everything looks a little strange 6k symbolical when one comes back. I was in a queer mood, thinking myself very old: but now I am a woman again—as I always am when I write. It is scattering 6k heatening, this motoring about.
The Woolfs went to Cassis by train via Folkestone-Boulogne-Paris-Marseilles on 4 June; they took rooms in Fontcreuse hut meals with Vanessa and Duncan Grant, who drove them to Aries on their homeward journey. They reached home on 14 June.
Saturday 15 June
Home last night from Cassis; that is to say from Aries. The hottest holiday I have ever had. And in some ways different from others; partly

that it was so hot; then that we were alone with Nessa & Duncan; then that I have become, almost, a landowner. A window owner, anyhow. Yes, I almost bought La Boudard (& am not sure of the spelling) & have a contract, to go there at the cost of £2.10 a month.1 And this means an infinite number of things—perhaps a complete change; as buying a house so often does. Already this morning I feel an attachment—say a little island—floating some way off, but in my possession. And this island means heat, silence, complete aloofness from London; the sea; eating cakes in the new hotel at La Ciotat; driving off to Aix; sitting on the harbour dining; seeing the sardine boats come in; talk with people who have never heard of me & think me older, uglier than Nessa, & in every way inferior to her; that odd intimate, yet edgy, happy free yet somehow restrained intercourse with her & Duncan. It means also buying French books at Toulon & keeping them in my lovely cool room in the wood; Leonard in his shirtsleeves; an Eastern private life for us both; an Indian summer running in & out of the light of common day; a great deal of cheap wine & cigars; new alliances, with Currys, Cruthers, & other anomalous oddities2—all this my engagement to make three windows at Boudard means to me.
I forget what the facts of our stay were. We were there for a week, coming the day before they expected us, oddly enough as we did last year. There was Duncan in his blue shirt; Angelica & Judith doing lessons on the terrace. Nessa drove Miss Campbell into the town & brought up the food every morning. I wrote a little article on Cowper, but lifting the words with difficulty in the heat, surrounded by black & white butterflies.3 And L. & I were very extravagant, for the first time in our lives, buying desks, tables, sideboards, crockery for Rodmell. This gave me pleasure; & set my dander up against Nessa's almost overpowering supremacy. My elder son is coming tomorrow; yes, & he is the most promising young man in King's; & has been speaking at the Apostles dinner. All I can oppose that with is, And I made £2,000 out of Orlando & can bring Leonard here & buy a house if I want. To which she replies (in the same inaudible way) I am a failure as a painter compared with you, & cant do more than

pay for my models. And so we go on; over the depths of our childhood. Do you remember going down to the town to fetch — which ancient memories Duncan cannot share. He was divinely charming; & praised Nessa too. I put in shred after shred of feeling so that one may compose the salad, & am now running out to get my books from Riley if I can.4
VW here begins DIARY XIX.
Saturday 15 June
Against all laws, I am going to make this the first volume of a diary, though as ill luck has it, it is not even the first ofthe month. But it is the fault of practical life. I can't write any longer in books whose leaves perish. I don't know how to keep them. Here in a bound volume, the year has a chance of life. It can be stood on a shelf.
Pinker has just come home, very fat. And a sense of nothingness rolls about the house; what I call the sense of "Where there is nothing." This is due to the fact that we came back from France last night & are not going round in the mill yet. Time flaps on the mast—my own phrase I think. There are things I ought to do. I ought to correct A Room of one's own: I ought to read & correct the Common Reader. I ought to write several dull silly letters; to gentlemen in Maidstone & Kingston who tell me facts about dahlias; to Sir Philip Sassoon who most unexpectedly sends me, by motor car, his book of travels.5 But I cant—not for five minutes or so. Time flaps on the mast. And then I see through everything. Perhaps the image ought to have been one that gives an idea of a stream becoming thin: of seeing to the bottom. Lytton once said,—I connect it with a visit to Kew Gardens—that we can only live if we see through illusion. & that reminds me (it is odd by the way, how small a thought is which one cannot express pictorially, as one has been accustomed to thinking it: this saying of Lytton's has always come pictorially, with heat, flowers, grass, summer, & myself walking at Kew) reminds me how the day before we went Lytton came, & we talked about Elizabeth & Essex. This was for the first time. And it was painful, because he minded what we had not said; & we had, to some extent to say it; but it was also a relief, on both sides, because we were glad to say it, & have this reserve over; & glad, I daresay, that Lytton minded; I daresay there was some discreditable element, at least in my

gladness; yet not much. I daresay, among my disagreeables, is this that I am jealous enough of other writers to be glad when they are made to own their failures; but this was trifling. More important much was the relief that one could say openly that one had disliked E & E for such reasons; & we began to go into them. His suppression of irony; his being tied by the story; the difficulty of using reality imaginatively; a wrong subject for him; could only be treated exactly. He said he had been very doubtful himself; & this is what I liked—that though his surrounders— Carrington Dadie & the rest—all praised, he himself felt, he was not pleased unless we Bloomsbury, praised too. What we said mattered. And I daresay, owing to success, he minds these reservations a great deal more than I should; for I kept thinking of all the criticism I had had. One is pleased when 'after long yea[r]s' such feelings have sway.6 And I felt, among the discreditable feelings, how I had no longer anything to envy him for; & how, dashing off Orlando I had done better than he had done; & how for the first time I think, he thought of me, as a writer, with some envy. Yet he amused me by protesting that to write like that would be to write like Virginia—a fatal event, it seems.
Now time must not flap on the mast any more. Now I must somehow brew another decoction of illusion. Well, if the human interest flags—if its that that worries me, I must not sit thinking about it here. I must make human illusion—ask someone in tomorrow after dinner; & begin that astonishing adventure with the souls of others again—about which I know so little. Is it affection that prompts?
Sunday 16 June
As I finished those words, in came Leonard to say that Desmond was coming round in two minutes—which he did, so that the sail filled out again & the ship went on. (The reason why I write this is that I cannot go on correcting A Room of one's own. I have read till my own sentences jingle in my ear—& so I begin to make more). Desmond was shabby & baggy in grey. He was bubbling & simmering, off to dine with Crompton Davies at Kettner's, & determined to be punctual.7 A vein of determination lies in him; & he is the most cooked & saturated of us all. Not an atom remains crude; basted richly over a slow fire—an adorable man, a divine

man, as Francis would say, for all his power of taking the spine out of me. Happily we did not get on to that—writing that is to say. Julian broke down in his Apostle speech; came dressed as for a ball, & got muddled in his notes & sat down; but with his admirable Stephen solidity did not mind. Also Desmond lost £5 to Lord Rothermere, & another man lost £2,000, over the Election. What circles you live in, said Leonard; & he said that this was only due to the Empire Review. Maynard he said looked as if he were conscious of discord at the Apostle dinner.8 We talked of Lytton's books. But talk ran into talk; nothing could be spread out; he must not be late for Crompton. He (C.) lives in Gledhow Terrace, with two leather chairs in the dining room; behind it his bedroom; he has his Virgil & a Milton that Desmond gave him. My Milton, said Leonard; & I offered to give Desmond a new despatch box. Off he went talking all the way. And Pinker came back &—
Sunday 23 June
It was very hot that day, driving to Worthing to see Leonard's mother, my throat hurt me. Next morning I had a headache. So we stayed on at Rodmell till today. At Rodmell I read through the Common Reader; & this is very important—I must learn to write more succinctly. Especially in the general idea essays like the last, How it strikes a Contemporary, I am horrified by my own looseness. This is partly that I dont think things out first; partly that I stretch my style to take in crumbs of meaning. But the result is a wobble & diffusity & breathlessness which I detest. One must correct A room of one's own very carefully before printing. And so I pitched into my great lake of melancholy. Lord how deep it is! What a born melancholiac I am! The only way I keep afloat is      .             „,.
1          i-A         r     1                 *            1                 Aug. 31st This
by working. A note for the summer 1 must take more         ° j ^   t
work than I can possibly get done. (I am)—no, I dont know what it comes from. Directly I stop working I feel that I am sinking down, down. And as usual, I feel that if I sink further I shall reach the truth. That is the only mitigation; a kind of nobility. Solemnity. I shall make myself face the fact that there is nothing—nothing for any of us. Work, reading, writing are all disguises; & relations with people. Yes, even having children would be useless.
We went into the beechwood by the Race Course. I like these woods; & the waters of the greenery closing over one; so shallow, with the sun on

them; then so deep in the shade. And I like the beech boughs, laced about, very intricate; like many arms; & the trunks, like the stone pillars in a church. But if I were Mrs Bartholomew I should certainly do something violent. This thought kept coming to me. What though could one do, at the bottom of that weight[?]; with that incubus of injustice on top of one? Annie Thompsett & her baby live on 15/ a week. I throw away 13/-on cigarettes, chocolates, & bus fares. She was eating rice pudding by the baby's cradle when I came in.9
However, I now begin to see the Moths rather too clearly, or at least strenuously, for my comfort. I think it will begin like this: dawn; the shells on a beach; I dont know—voices of cock & nightingale; & then all the children at a long table—lessons. The beginning. Well, all sorts of characters are to be there. Then the person who is at the table can call out any one of them at any moment; & build up by that person the mood, tell a story; for instance about dogs or nurses; or some adventure of a childs kind; all to be very Arabian nights; & so on: this shall be Childhood; but it must not be my childhood; & boats on the pond; the sense of children; unreality; things oddly proportioned. Then another person or figure must be selected. The unreal world must be round all this—the phantom waves. The Moth must come in: the beautiful single moth. There must be a flower
growing.
Could one not get the waves to be heard all through? Or the farmyard noises? Some odd irrelevant noises. She might have a book—one book to read in—another to write in—old letters.
Early morning light—but this need not be insisted on; because there must be great freedom from 'reality'. Yet everything must have relevance.
Well all this is of course the 'real' life; & nothingness only comes in the absence of this. I have proved this quite certainly in the past half hour. Everything becomes green & vivified in me when I begin to think of the Moths. Also, I think, one is much better able to enter into other's—
Sunday 30 June
I broke off; somebody I imagine interrupted. My melancholy has been broken, like a lake by oars, since I wrote. I have been so active. We have seen so many people. Last night we dined with Roger, tonight with Clive; Lytton came; Vita came; we had a party. I brought a dress in Shaftesbury Avenue. It was very hot, I think; & is now cold, indeed, for the first time for weeks, it is, or has been raining. I am writing idly, to solace my eyes

after two hours of intense correction—that much corrected book, Women & Fiction. It shall go to the printer tomorrow I swear. And then I can bask entirely in the light of some fiction. But I have written myself out of that mood, & find it difficult to get back to it. This last half year I made over £1800; almost at the rate of £4000 a year; the salary almost of a Cabinet minister; & time was, two years ago, when I toiled to make £200. Now I am overpaid I think for my little articles— And I still think that the great pleasure of prosperity is to be able to go into a shop & buy a pocket knife. Well, after tomorrow I shall close down article writing, & give way to fiction for six or seven months—till next March perhaps. And I here record my intention to see to the writing of this new book much more carefully; to strike out redundancies. Now that I have, I think, gained the free use of my pen, I must begin to curb it. Hitherto my freedom has had to be fought for.
Helen Anrep last night was distracted & worried, like a wet overblown Rose. Baba got out of her bed & went on the roof & fell asleep there. So Miss Cox proposes to put her down into a lower class for a year. And Roger had news that her Hampstead House was falling down; would need £500 spent on it. And how could she live on the income of £3,000 if she sold it to the Hampstead Hospital?10 The other day in Paris she thought she was going to have a child by Roger. "And I've failed utterly with the children I have—And I feel a hundred." So she plained & crooned, sitting beside Roger, with her hand on the arm ofhis chair. Sometimes he put his hand on hers. They were affectionate & private; this is Roger's private life. And it keeps him happy, while superficially he whirls from doctor to doctor; & springs & spins, & looks out places on the map—unable not to verify & track down any statement, however pointless. He told us how in some great French cave, there is a patch of green vegetation wherever the torchlight has fallen. And Mauron ran his hand along a ledge & thought it was moss. But it was bats dung. The bats fly up into the air.
Desmond is being very brilliant about the Byron letters & the Boswell papers. Think! There are 18 volumes of Boswell's diaries now to be published. With any luck I shall live to read them. I feel as if some dead

person were said to be living after all—an odd effect, this disinterment of a mass more of Boswell when one had thought all was known, all settled. And father never knew; & Sir Edmund Gosse is dead. These papers were in a cabinet in Ireland.11
And now it is almost time for lunch; & after lunch I must again read my book; with a view, if possible, to shortening & condensing the last pages.
The Woolfs spent each week-end in July at Rodmell, and on zyth moved there for ten weeks' respite from the metropolitan 'helter skelter . VW had been suffering intermittently from headaches and depression. Ka Arnold-Foster came to Monks House for the night of 4 August.
Monday 5 August
Yes that is the date, & the last was June 30th—a tribute to the helter skelter random rackety summer I spent. Far the pleasantest memories, standing out like green weed on some civet grey pond, were the week ends here: the divine fresh week ends, with the hay cutting & the lights lambent; Leonard's new room, Hedgehog Hall a-building, & my lodge being made into the palace of comfort which it now is. For I am now sitting here, oppressed by the Bank holiday atmosphere which gets into the wild country air, the lonely marshes, & makes the village seem smug & suburban. The girls & men are playing stool ball; Leonard & Percy are making a pipe conduct water into the Pond. It is a chocolate brown, & lived in by small fish. Yes it was a scattered summer; I felt as if the telephone were strung to my arm 6k anybody could jerk me who liked. A sense of interruption bothered me. And then these people one 'sees'—how blurred the image becomes! What damp blotting paper my mind was, as I left Ottoline's on Thursday afternoon, & determined not to speak to another soul. There is a sort of irreverence in treating thus the venerable soul of man: one curses it, & bites it & gets embittered by it. More pleasure is to be had from one nights talk with old dunderheaded Ka than from these flittering &

glitterings. In London I should only have girded at her. Here, spreading herself out in her slow heavy footed way one took in an easy half critical, half appreciative impression—the chief element being amusement at her protestations. When the story was not to her credit as a social centre, it was to his as a speaker, politician, gardener, artist, husband, thinker— everything. Indeed I cut her short this morning, as she exalted his brain, by saying we all live on illusion; Will's brain is one of them. Thus pulled up she jibbed a moment, & then recovered, & saw the sense; not quite, perhaps; but in her slow way, larded over with these shams & gentilities & politics & appearances, she is honest too. And we talked about Rupert. But my reflection—every visit leaves one with a reflection—was this, about talking in protest, to impress, its futility, its universality: only she is more open & insistent, for some reason, than we are—or so I hope. Take away that motive from one's talk, & how much would be left? How often don't I vaguely feel blessing my sentence, the face of my own vanity, which demands that I shall pay it this tribute.
And then I'm cross with Vita: she never told me she was going abroad for a fortnight—didnt dare; till the last moment, when she said it was a sudden plan.1 Lord Lord! I am half amused though; why do I mind? what do I mind? how much do I mind? I shall fire up & accuse her, & see to the bottom of her vessel. One of the facts is that these Hildas are a chronic case; & as this one won't disappear & is unattached, she may be permanent. And, like the damned intellectual snob I am, I hate to be linked, even by an arm, with Hilda. Her earnest aspiring competent wooden face appears before me, seeking guidance in the grave question of who's to broadcast. A queer trait in Vita—her passion for the earnest middle-class intellectual, however drab & dreary. And why do I write this down? I have not even told Leonard; & whom do I tell when I tell a blank page? The truth is, I get nearer feelings in writing than in walking [sic]—I think: graze the bone; enjoy the expression; have them out of me; make them a little creditable to myself; I daresay suppress something, so that after all I'm doing what amounts to confiding. Why did Pepys write his diary after all?
I should be tackling Mary Wollstonecraft. I am in the thick of my four Herald articles,2 thus cutting into my Moths (but I had proofs of A Room to correct) & hope to be quit of it all by August 14th & then go down step by step into that queer region. I must make a great try for it—for this

difficult book—& after that? Always adventure: with that sense to guide me, I shant stagnate anyhow.
You can choose between us, I say, stopping writing; & get some satisfaction from making up caustic phrases. Yet I'm not very caustic, only by starts.
Thursday 8 August
This is written to while away one of those stupendous moments—one of those painful, ridiculous, agitating moments which make one half sick
& yet I dont know—I'm excited too; & feel free Another scene, Aug. 30th; & then sordid. & unsettled; & so on—I've told but these reflections stood    jy,                after     $eries of scenes whkh j
me in good stead—ol 1
laughed But what a             wont bore myself to describe. And in the midst
confounded bore it is           ofthe usual anger, I looked into her little shift-
ing greedy eyes, & saw nothing but malice & spite there, 6k felt that that had come to be the reality now: she doesn't care for me, or for anything: has been eaten up by her poor timid servants fears 6k cares 6k respectabilities. And so at lunch L. 6k I settled it; 6k I spoke two words, which she almost pulled out of my mouth in her eagerness to show herself delighted 6k eager 6k hard 6k untouched—a sordid painful scene after 15 years; but then how many I have had, 6k how degrading they are. 6k if we dont break now we drift on endlessly—oh but all these old arguments I know by heart. Whats new 6k strange is to have made an end of it, for though we only speak of her staying away till October, I dont think we shall ever begin again. This is an occasion for some ofthe small virtues of life—cheerfulness, 6k decision, 6k the determination to start fresh 6k better. In truth we never should have gone on, I daresay, if it hadn't been for the war; I dont know: I'm confirmed in my wish to have no resident servants ever again. That is the evil which rots the relationship. But now I must go to Annie Thomsett again.
Saturday 10 August*
Well, Heaven be praised; it is all over 6k calm 6k settled. Nelly—how long ago that seems!—is staying—Yes, we found we cdnt get Mrs Thomsett; 6k I had two minutes of energetic courage; 6k so, Nelly saying, she thought—but I'm too bored. And I'm too deliciously relieved to have seen Vita this moment 6k find that her story to me was precisely true—6k she brought documents to prove it—6k was very upset—6k had gone

like a donkey 6k telephoned to Hilda—who is also very upset, 6k was altogether so simple 6k sincere 6k saw that my position was reasonable— oh yes, she could not have stood it a moment—but why, I ask myself, does it bore me so insufferably to write down what is so acutely exciting at the moment? My own lack of narrative power. Indeed I was more worried 6k angry 6k hurt 6k caustic about this affair than I let on, even to the blank page; yet afraid too of exaggeration. Of course, one is right about Nelly—right that she is, in bad moods almost insufferably mean, selfish 6k spiteful; but—6k this is an interesting psychological remark, she is in a ¦state of nature; untrained; uneducated, to me almost incredibly without the power of analysis or logic; so that one sees a human mind wriggling undressed—which is interesting; 6k then, in the midst of one's horror at the loathesome spectacle, one is surprised by the goodness of human nature, undressed; 6k it is more impressive because of its undress. For example, she thought I had given her notice permanently; but instead of giving way, —6k yet she had nowhere to go to—to rage or spite, she bicycled into Lewes to get us cream for dinner: the motive being genuine I think; we must not suffer; 6k how could she leave us without a cook? It is this mixture that one can't understand; 6k that makes one always plunge so heavily in dealing with her. She said too that she would find it very difficult to get a place; since it is all the fashion now to engage cooks only who will live out (6k this sentence is another example of my inability to write narrative). And it will happen again, her spite 6k meanness; but we shan't part now, I think. And I'm half pleased to find that it is harder to part after 15 years than I thought. And I'm pleased—oh very pleased—about Vita.
Thursday 15 August
These tumults over, then I had a headache. And two ideas come to me— to break my rule 6k write about the soul for once; 6k to write some exact dialogue: I just note this, it being dinner time.
We are back from Brighton where I brought a corner cupboard. And if I had time, I would here dissect a curious little spotted fruit: this melancholy. It comes with headache, of course. And I had come to the blind alley —the cul de-sac. Writing this compressed article, where every word is like a step cut in the rock—hard work, if ever writing was; 6k done largely for money; 6k whats money, compared with Nessa's children; 6k then the—
Monday 19 August
I suppose dinner interrupted. And I opened this book in another train of mind—to record the blessed fact that for good or bad I have just set the

last correction to Women & Fiction, or a Room of One's Own. I shall never read it again I suppose. Good or bad? Has an uneasy life in it I think: you feel the creature arching its back & galloping on, though as usual much is watery & flimsy 6k pitched in too high a voice.
William Plomer has been for the week end 6k gone. A compressed inarticulate young man, thickly coated with a universal manner fit for all weather & people: tells a nice dry prim story; but has the wild eyes which I once noted in Tom, 6k take to be the true index of what goes on within. Once or twice he almost cracked his crust—sitting on the stones this
morning for instance.
I dont suppose you know how separate I feel myself from all my contemporaries. I am afraid I was very inadequate last night (at Charleston). I apologised for the family party. No that was delightful; except that Clive Bell seemed inharmonious. What d'you think of Wyndham Lewis, of Joyce ?4 (V.) I dont like scolds. It spoils the voice. I like old men of 80 like Moore & Yeats who have kept their minds working. "Exactly. That's the precise point" (these are William's words). And fathers are difficult. Mine has no interest in anything. But I dont live at Pinner for choice. I dislike Roy Campbell's pose.5 He used to fly a kite at the end of a fishing rod. William (he said the Mr was awkward) is notably trying to be like ^    i other people: to justify his life among natives & colonels, which has given him this composure. Beside him Julian seemed a mere child, & Duncan a contemporary. May he bring Butts to see us?6 He is a very self-contained independent young man, determined not to be rushed in any way, & having no money at all, he gave Nelly 5/ for a tip. I think he shows up well against the Raymonds 6k the Frankies—is somehow solid; to their
pinchbeck lustre.
I have now written myself out of a writing mood; 6k cannot attack melancholy, save only to note that it was much diminished by hearing Nessa say she was often melancholy 6k often envied me—a statement I

thought incredible. I have spilt myself among too many stools she said (we were sitting in her bedroom before dinner). Other peoples melancholy certainly cheers one. And now, having written my four little brief hard articles, I must think of that book again, 6k go down step by step into the well. These are the great events 6k revolutions in one's life—6k then people talk of war 6k politics. I shall grind very hard; all my brakes will be stiff; my springs rusty. But I have now earned the right to some months of fiction. 6k my melancholy is brushed away, so soon as I can get my mind forging ahead, not circling round.
Wednesday 21 August
Geoffrey Scott died last week of pneumonia in New York. Let me think what I can remember of him. I met him first in 1909 at Florence at Mrs Berenson's. We went out for lunch, 6k he was there; 6k they discussed Francis Thompson. Afterwards we went to a party at Mrs Ross's: Mary came in with a brother, both disguised as Barnes, 6k had to reveal themselves as Stracheys before Mrs Ross would take any interest. Then she emphasised the fact that she was Meredith's mistress, leading us all down a lawn; —a terrace I suppose, overlooking Fiesole. I was unhappy that summer, 6k bitter in all my judgments; 6k cannot remember anything of Geoffrey Scott save that he was part of that unnatural Florentine society; 6k therefore in my mood, rather contemptible—long 6k familiar 6k aesthetic 6k at his ease, where I was rustic, provincial 6k badly dressed.7 This impression then waits without a second till that summer evening, in 1925,1 think, at Long Barn.81 had motored down with Dotty 6k Vita for my first visit 6k had sat shyly in the motor observing their endearments rather awkwardly, 6k how they stopped the Rolls Royce to buy great baskets of strawberries; 6k again I felt, not provincial, but ill-dressed, under-equipped; 6k so stepped on to the terrace at Long Barn; 6k forth came Geoffrey, smiling a little superciliously, as of old; 6k shook hands. Harold [Nicolson] was behind him, much more downright 6k burly 6k to my taste. That night we sat in

the long room, 6k after Harold had grown sleepy sitting on the fender knocking his head against the fringe ofthe Italian cover on themantelpice, Geoffrey sat with us, & was drawn by Dotty into telling stories for my amusement. He did this very well; I remember, though 1 dont remember what the stories were about. He was a very clever man, I thought; & I tried to place him, 6k concluded that he had some grudge against me as member of a circle he somehow respected but was not of; told me, I remember, that he could not distinguish an article by me in the Nation from one by Morgan or Lytton—we all wrote the same ironic style—& that I felt was said by way of showing me—& we were the two scallywags at that particular party—that he was up to our little ways & had no respect for them. Then next day we went over Knole, where again, as at Florence, he was very much at his ease, & knew every piece of furniture or silver & called Lord Sackville Lionel as if he had known him & Vita familiarly many years, just as he had known the Rosses & the Berensons. And he was tall, & dark 6k had the distinguished face of a failure; reminded me a little of Bernard Holland & other 'brilliant' young men,9 who remain 'brilliant' & young well into the 40ties & never do anything to prove it. Harold walked back through the Park to think out some speech about Byron, simply & straightforwardly, rather to my & I think Geoffrey's amusement. The others—Dotty Vita & Geoffrey—took me to the station; & I said goodbye to him there, & never spoke to him again. I had the feeling that he & Dotty 6k Vita & Harold were all a set; very intimate & familiar, & indeed said so, when they challenged me, as usual, with Bloomsbury & its closed walls. "But you are the same—you make me feel that you are all very intimate" I said, 6k they half denied it; but only half. For, as I learnt later, I had broken in upon the height of his affair with Vita. It was flaming very strongly that particular month, or week; it was the time when she returned his passion, for a moment; when he was swearing that she must leave Harold & live with him. After that, my intercourse with him was only by hearsay—through messages—Karin said her mother wished her to arrange a meeting between Geoffrey & me —& then through Vita's explanations, later, when she told me how he was waiting for her, had left his Villa Medici 6k Lady Sybil on her account;10 & was now fuming in a mews off Regent's Park expecting her while she sat at Tavistock Square talking to me. One night, she said, he almost strangled her—seized her by the throat; & she turned black & he was

frightened. And I heard how furious he was on the downs above Rodmell
that summer, late at night, when they were driving home, from Lady
Sackville I suppose. Vita saw lights in the valley & said that I was down
there asleep. Whereupon he flew into another rage—they were calling
the dogs who had gone hunting, & the wind blew his hat off. He called
me 'that woman'. And I saw him, in full evening dress, at the ballet with
Sybil [Colefax]. And then never again.
He is dead in New York, & all those papers about Boswell—what will
become of them; & the life that was to have made him    T         _     ,
,     .„            ,         .         o,                   ,       1 was ottered
immortal will never be written; & he remains the     /•__. .„ „ •,„ .,
'                                  £2000 to write it brilliant young man for ever.11
And I have turned over two pages by mistake. Perhaps I can think of some other figure to write in there, going backwards, before I need go in: & it is a lovely evening; & I want to stay out here writing, & trying my new pen.
Nobody has died, to my knowledge, of much interest. And if it comes to putting down talk, the truth is that, except in novels, people don't talk.
Well, Bernard Holland, as I have mentioned him.12 But I cannot put my hand on any first meeting or even second. I believe I first heard him mentioned when I was say ten years old; & he had just become engaged to Helen Duckworth. Stella said to mother, "But can they know what he thinks then?"—or words which made me surmise that there was something dark & queer about this young man; something that to Stella seemed incongruous with the rusticity & conventionality of her Duckworth aunt & uncle. Then that little light, revealing as it was, goes out; & there is only hearsay about Bernard till, in 1902 or 3 perhaps, Dorothea took me uninvited to stay at Canterbury with Canon Holland;13 6k there was Bernard; 6k he was saturnine, with his great eyebrows almost meeting; 6k his sunk cheeks; 6k his gloom; 6k his height; 6k about him there hung, now more authentically, that reputation for brilliance 6k strangeness that was his, years ago, at Cambridge. Poor old Bernard—he's a genius, I once

heard Harry Stephen say. He interested me because I imputed to him 'imagination'—the quality I most admired & missed most in my father & his agnostic friends. Bernard had edited his mother's letters, & I liked them in a sentimental way, seeing in them something imaginative, too; something that was coloured & pensive & intimate, unlike anything the Stephen family produced.14 So that I looked at Bernard in the low room under the Cathedral with interest, & even hoped he might think me clever or imaginative or something. But I doubt that he detached me from the shadow of Dorothea. He was occupied & mysterious, in touch with politics & Cabinet ministers; highly thought of by the Lytteltons, & vaguely credited with being himself much more able & capable than they were; but he was too much of a genius, too queer & individual, so people said, to do anything for himself. And Helen played up to this version of Bernard very femininely; wandering about vague eyed, cherry cheeked, ecstatic, religious; like some woman I thought in a novel by Charlotte Yonge.15 We were taken to see a sister of Mary Sibylla's, & she said, clasping her tea cup, that whenever she heard thunder she imagined that someone had been killed by it. There was all that kind of imagination afloat. Bernard stalked about in it, aloof, intellectual, silent; appreciative perhaps, but never said so. Helen played little melancholy scraps of Beethoven; which moved me; but Bernard snapped "Whats that? Gilbert & Sullivan?" to snub her sentimentality I suppose. And then, when there was talk of going back in the train together, he stopped it. He said that he must be alone & work. So I suppose I made no impression; & received one that was not altogether favourable. A sort of false gloom was his I thought; unless indeed he were tremendously imaginative. I read a book he wrote anonymously about becoming a Roman Catholic & got a faint seductive whiff of a world where people were very brilliant & thought about their souls; a semi-worldly world it seemed; rather fluent; rather too clear & plausible & pensive, but still attractive & unfamiliar. And then again I met him at Ottoline's; & then I was older, & he was more pronounced. That is he was still sardonic; cavernous; but no longer so lean, or so silent. He flirted, even I could see, with Ottoline; & had become one of those distinguished young men who are very brilliant when they dine out—like Herbert Paul perhaps;18 they appear without

their wives, who are deaf or mad; influence politics; write unsigned articles; & flirt with ladies of title. Ottoline told me that Bernard had written her a sonnet, after another dinner party. And then he turned Roman Catholic. He wrote a vast life ofthe Duke of Devonshire; he wrote a vast history of the Holland family;17 but that was all that came of his gloom & his imagination & his genius, & when he died, a year or two ago, even his friends never wrote to the Times about him.
Thursday 22 August
And so I might fill up the half hour before dinner writing.
I thought, on my walk that I would begin at the beginning: I get up at half past eight & walk across the garden. Today it was misty & I had been dreaming of Edith Sitwell. I wash & go into breakfast which is laid on the check table cloth. With luck I may have an interesting letter; today there was none. And then bath & dress; & come out here & write or correct for three hours, broken at 11 by Leonard with Milk, & perhaps newspapers. At one luncheon—rissoles today & chocolate custard. A brief reading & smoking after lunch; & at about two I change into thick shoes, take Pinker's lead & go out—up to Asheham hill this afternoon, where I sat a minute or two, & then home again, along the river. Tea at four, about; & then I come out here & write several letters, interrupted by the Post, with another invitation to lecture; & then I read one book of the Prelude. And soon the bell will ring, & we shall dine & then we shall have some music, & I shall smoke a cigar; & then we shall read—La Fontaine I think tonight & the papers—& so to bed. Here I will copy some lines I want to remember,
The matter that detains us now may seem, To many, neither dignified enough Nor arduous, yet will not be scorned by them, Who, looking inward, have observed the ties That bind the perishable hours of life Each to the other, & the curious props By which the world of memory & thought Exists & is sustained.
of biography and history. He was married to a sister-in-law of Lady Ritchie, VW's 'Aunt Anny'. 17.  The Life of Spencer Compton, 8th Duke of Devonshire (2 vols. 1911), and The Lancashire  Hollands . . . With  illustrations  and pedigrees  (1917).   In   1923   he published Belief and Freedom, a popular argument on behalf of Roman Catholicism.

They are from the 7th book of the Prelude.18 A very good quotation I
think.
But my skeleton day needs reviving with all sorts of different colours. Today it was grey & windy on the walk; yesterday generous & open; a yellow sun on the corn; & heat in the valley. Both days differ greatly; both are among the happiest of my life—I mean among the happy undistinguished days, ripe & sweet & sound; the daily bread; for nothing strange or exalted has happened; only the day has gone rightly & harmoniously; a pattern of the best part of life which is in the country like this; & makes me wish to command more of them—months of them.
Now my little tugging & distressing book 6k articles are off my mind my brain seems to fill & expand & grow physically light & peaceful. I begin to feel it filling quietly after all the wringing & squeezing it has had since we came here. And so the unconscious part now expands; & walking I notice the red corn, & the blue ofthe plain & an infinite number of things without naming them; because I am not thinking of any special thing. Now & again I feel my mind take shape, like a cloud with the sun on it, as some idea, plan, or image wells up, but they travel on, over the horizon, like clouds, & I wait peacefully for another to form, or nothing—it matters
not which.
One picture I saw—Phil Burne Jones sitting in the square of St Mark's, in evening dress, alone one August night in 1912—for we were on our honeymoon. He looked dissipated & lonely, like a pierrot who had grown old & rather peevish. He wore a light overcoat & sat, his foolish nervous white face looking aged & set unhappy & eager & disillusioned, alone at a little marble table, while everyone else paraded or chattered & the band played—he had no companion—none of his smart ladies—nobody to chatter to, in his affected exaggerated voice; paying astonishing compliments, using dears & darlings 6k going into that once fashionable whinny of laughter which must I think have come down from Burne Jones himself —6k Phil was a kind of dissipated degenerate, spending all the thousands that were paid for those wan women on staircases, on love affairs, on luxuries, on being a fashionable bachelor & fairy God father to the Trees & Taylors & other fashionable young ladies—a very timid conventional man at bottom, with a horrid taste in pictures, presumably, but a way with children. Lowell noticed that at St Ives. And I am still grateful for pictures that he drew for us. He belongs to the gallery of brilliant young men of 50, for he died a year or two ago.19

The best part of my walk this afternoon was certainly on the top of the down leading to Juggs Corner.
Yes, yes, but that is days ago. I saw a woman in white sitting against soft snow banks of blue & white sky; & a child in blue: I saw all the downs glooming & brightening. But it is now
Monday 2 September
6k I am writing these words because Lyn (yes, she is Lyn) is reading in the garden, & I am talk-dried, & cant begin the Moths as I should, or patch up finally those old articles.1 A long day it was yesterday—rather exhausting —hard work talking to someone one hardly knows in the orchard. A very nice young woman, with that essential bareness—I cant think of the word—that young women so often have—without illusions, about herself; an honesty bred of poverty. Keeping going on £200 a year in London which she earns. Pays her way week by week on articles; & her father has £600 as a presbyterian minister in Aberdeen, & will have £400 to retire on, & has 5 children. So that she will never have a penny of her own. All this breeds a kind of veracity & clear sightedness & austerity which I prefer, perhaps, to the lush undergrowth which surrounds Dotty. One gardener more or less, one persian pot more or less, what does it matter— her life is crowded & otiose; but Lyn knows every object in her room, & has saved up & bought them by saving so that they are exact & polished. Well, but of her? Oh I'm so sick of talk, & analysis.
This book would form in me could I let my mind lie asleep, calm like a tideless sea; but all this time I'm breaking my mind up; destroying the
growth underneath. Never mind, after tomorrow      . „. .
,        T             ,r.         i-    1    l    •     *  t   1   11         I his was a sanguine
when I go to Vita, solitude begins.*  I shall        gueSs-not fulfilled ruminate for a month. Lyn has this austerity. She is direct 6k sensible; goes to the W.C. frankly; but is not sexually
led a frivolous social life as a man about town. The 'wan women on staircases' is an allusion to his father's painting of 1872-80 in the Tate Gallery, 'The Golden Stairs'. The Trees were the three vivacious daughters of Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree; and the Taylors, Viola and Una, the granddaughters of Sir Henry Taylor (see above, io November 1928, n 12). James Russell Lowell (1819-1891), poet and man of letters, was American Ambassador in London, 1880-85, and in effect, VW's godfather.
Lyn Lloyd Irvine (1901-1973) had got to know the Woolfs as a result of her submitting poetry to the N & A and a novel to the Hogarth Press; though he did not publish it, LW thought well enough of her writing to invite her to contribute reviews to the N & A. Enid Welsford (below), a lecturer in English at Newnham, was a friend of hers.

advanced I should say; has had no indulgences with young men or wine; has something cool headed & sensible about her, derived from her theological father, her Scots farmer birth no doubt. She has been trained in English literature & is, what young women so seldom are, or were, a trained critic. She gives her opinion precisely & methodically, rather as Janet Vaughan would do on a case. (Janet was here last week end, by the way.) This trained mind is new & rather strange. It seems to eliminate enthusiasm, perhaps too drastically. Its odd to find everything weighed & criticised. & words of sobriety & insight issuing from this innocent round pink face; these candid blue eyes. She will spend money on face powder— went to buy a special brand & bought a cactus instead. Oh & she told a story about the dead man on the sands. She 6k Enid Welsford were motoring. One night they came to a bay & Enid wanted to walk to a long stretch of sand. So they went; & Lyn saw a coat & a pair of boots in the sand; & found it was a dead man. She stopped & went back, giving Enid the slip, not thinking that children might find it; absolutely horrified; her first sight of a dead person. This was made vivid to me. Enid came back. Did you see something? Yes I saw it. So they told the villagers. The man had been unhappily married 6k had seemed depressed & so killed himself, to be found that sad grey night—his boots sticking out of the sand, the face I suppose very ghastly.
I have just read a page or two of Samuel Butler's notebooks to take the taste of Alice Meynell's life out of my mouth.2 One rather craves brilliance 6k cantankerousness. Yet I am interested; a little teased by the tight airless Meynell style; & then I think what they had that we had not—some suavity & grace, certainly. They believed in things & we didn't; & she had 7 children & wrote about 5 paragraphs a day for society papers & so on—all the time looking like a crucified saint; & was also very merry & witty perhaps—anyhow absolutely steeped in various sorts of adventure 6k life—went to America lecturing & made £15 a lecture, which she sent back to help Wilfrid. But it is not exactly this that I mean. When one reads a life one often compares one's own life with it. And doing this I was aware of some sweetness & dignity in those lives compared with ours—even with ours at this moment. Yet in fact their lives would be intolerable—so insincere, so elaborate; so I think—all this word paring 6k

sweetness & charity. Viola cant help dropping in lump after lump of sugar —only two sharp & therefore memorable things survive—her mother failed as a friend. She never gave enough. Old Coventry Patmore, whom she thought the equal of Sh[akespea]re, complained that he had lost the primacy among her friends & dropped out; whereupon she went alone into the drawing room, for she hated to express her feelings, & also hated long accounts of illness 6k death in biographies, turning her face away from her son in her last illness, 6k letting him only kiss her hand. Secondly there was the oddity of her admiration for Chesterton. Had I been a man 6k very big I could have been Chesterton. That is, her views were all peculiar 6k angular, 6k stuck to pedantically. She had a line of her own. But it would be a wonderful relief if Viola would give up being pointed 6k precise 6k tell us something casual 6k familiar—only she cant: her mind in stays. Katherine Mansfield described a visit to the house in Sussex—All the Ms. in barns 6k cottages; 6k the daughters singing long monotonous ballads, 6k then, by way of contrast 6k to surprise a scallywag I daresay with their liveliness breaking into music hall songs taught them by their brothers in law. Katherine described them like so many B[urnej. J[ones]. mermaids with long lush hair, plucking at mediaeval instruments 6k intoning those verses. Mrs M. sat by. And I saw her in 1910 (?) at Mrs Ross's, 6k heard her say that saying about the climate 6k then there she was ecstatic in an omnibus.—I recorded my regret that one ever saw poetesses in the flesh.3 For she was a poetess too—it strikes me that one or two little poems will survive all that my father ever wrote. But its odd—this comparing that goes on as one reads a life—I kept thinking how little good could be said of me.
Wednesday I think the 4 September
I am just back from Long Barn, that is from Ashdown forest, where L. fetched me; 6k I have just eaten a pear warm from the sun with the juice running out of it, 6k I have thought of this device: to put
The Lonely Mind
separately in The Moths, as if it were a person. I don't know—it seems possible. And these notes show that I am very happy.
I daresay it is the hottest day this year—the hottest September day

these twenty years. So the papers may say tomorrow. Really it was too hot in the garden at Long Barn. The children were querulous—Nigel riding round in between the flower beds on his bicycle, & Ben stretched on the seat saying in a reasonable sad voice, Nigel you aren't well—you dont look well. Boski says you dont. Mummy he ought to wash his feet. Vita (from the window) but he has washed his feet. Ben. Well they're dirty again. Boski came in with the time table. The buses dont fit. They cant get back from Fairlawn before 8. Vita. Then ring up Mrs Cazalet 6k say they cant come. I must tell them they must put it off. She went to Harold's room where they sat working with Mr O'Connor, & told them. Nigel began arguing. She was firm, 6k strode away. All this happened in blazing heat.4 The car was very hot. George brought a bottle of soda water. We lunched among some pine trees in Ashdown Forest, & lay full length afterwards, I with my straw hat over my face. Then L. met us, punctually at 4, at Duddimans (no—not that name) & we sat on some prickly holly leaves on the heath 6k talked to Vita about Harold's letter. He says her poems aren't worth publishing. She is very calm & modest, & seems not to mind much—a less touchy poet never was. But then can a real poet be an un-touchy poet?5
She was very much as usual [?]; striding; silk stockings; shirt & skirt; opulent; easy; absent; talking spaciously 6k serenely to the Eton tutor, an admirable young man, with straight nose 6k white teeth who went to bed, or to his room, early, leaving us alone. I remarked the boys calling him Sir 6k bending with salaams over his hand 6k then kissing Vita—how English—how summery 6k how upper class—how pleasant—how without accent. This has been going on a thousand years I felt; at least, I can remember summers like this—white flannels 6k tennis, mothers, 6k tutors 6k English houses 6k dinner with moths getting in the candles 6k talk of tennis tournaments 6k ladies asking one to tea all my life—so pleasant, so without accent. And the tutor was the eternal tutor of young men— joking, affectionate, stern: watching Nigel with a sort of amusement 6k tenderness "There spoke the real Nigel" when N. said he hoped he had
4- For the past year Boski—Audrey le Bosquet—had been Vita's secretary. Fairlawne, the Cazalet's home, was at Tonbridge. Vincent Mansfield O'Connor (1904-1930), a junior classical master at Eton, was acting as the Nicolson boys' tutor during the
summer holidays. 5. George Thomsett was the Nicolson's butler. The meeting place was probably Duddleswell, roughly half way between Monks House and Long Barn. Harold Nicolson had written to advise Vita against the publication of King's Daughter, a collection of her poems which included some of a lesbian character; it was due to appear in the 'Hogarth Living Poets' series, and was in fact published in October 1919 {HP Checklist 207).

spilt the gravy on his trousers:—like a stream flowing deep 6k correct 6k unruffled through narrow banks. This kind of thing we now do to perfection. It is not interesting, but from its admirable completeness 6k sameness makes one tender towards it.
Nelly has been out this afternoon 6k picked, I think, 7 lbs of blackberries to make into jam. Please remember this as her way of thanking me for having Lottie—after all, she has no other. And one tends to forget it.
Monday 16 September
Leonard is having a picnic at Charleston 6k I am here—'tired'. But why am I tired? Well I am never alone. This is the beginning of my complaint. I am not physically tired so much as psychologically. I have strained 6k wrung at journalism 6k proof correction; 6k underneath has been forming my Moths book. Yes, but it forms very slowly; 6k what I want is not to write it, but to think it for two or three weeks say—to get into the same current of thought 6k let that submerge everything, writing perhaps a few phrases here at my window in the morning. (And they've gone to some lovely place—Hurstmonceux perhaps, in this strange misty evening;—6k yet when the time came to go, all I wanted was to walk off into the hills by myself. I am now feeling a little lonely 6k deserted 6k defrauded, inevitably). And every time I get into my current of thought I am jerked out of it. We have the Keynes's: then Vita came; then Angelica 6k Eve; then we went to Worthing, then my head begins throbbing—so here I am, not writing—that does not matter, but not thinking, feeling or seeing—6k seizing an afternoon alone as a treasure—Leonard appeared at the glass door at this moment; 6k they didn't go to H[urstmonceu]x or anywhere; 6k Sprott was there 6k a miner, so I missed nothing—one's first egotistical pleasure.6
Really these premonitions of a book—states of soul in creating—are very queer 6k little apprehended.
Another reflection—nothing is so tiring as a change of atmosphere. I am more shattered 6k dissipated by an hour with Leonard's mother than by 6 hours—no, 6 days, of Vita. (Nessa doesn't count). The tremendous gear changing that has to take place grinds one's machinery to bits. And

I have done this constantly—& what is more than doing it, I've foreboded doing it—I've counted up the days & felt Worthing brooding over me. & then, psychologically again, having Nelly in the car is to me a strain— imposes another forced atmosphere. None of these things would matter much if one's engine were going at full speed—how I tossed off every interruption when I was writing Orlando!—but it is as if they got in to the spokes—clogged the wheels—always just prevented me from getting the machine swinging round. And then I am 47: yes: 6k my infirmities will of course increase. To begin with my eyes. Last year, I think, I could read without spectacles; wd. pick up a paper & read it in a tube; gradually I found I needed spectacles in bed; & now I can't read a line (unless held at a very odd angle) without them. My new spectacles are much stronger than the old, 6k when I take them off, I am blinded for a moment. What other infirmities? I can hear, I think, perfectly: I think I could walk as well as ever. But then will there not be the change of life? And may that not be a difficult & even dangerous time? Obviously one can get over it by facing it with common sense—that it is a natural process; that one can lie out here & read; that one's faculties will be the same afterwards; that one has nothing to worry about in one sense— I've written some interesting books, can make money, can afford a holiday—Oh no; one has nothing to bother about; & these curious intervals in life—I've had many—are the most fruitful artistically—one becomes fertilised—think of my madness at Hogarth—6k all the little illnesses—that before I wrote To The Lighthouse for instance. Six weeks in bed now would make a masterpiece of Moths. But that wont be the name. Moths, I suddenly remember, dont fly by day. And there cant be a lighted candle. Altogether, the shape of the book wants considering—& with time I could do it. Here I broke off.
Saturday 21 September
Angelica goes to school for the first time today I think;7 & I daresay Nessa is crying to herself—one of the emotions I shall never know—a child, one's last child—going to school, 6k so ending the 21 years of Nessa's children—a great stretch of life; how much fuller than I can guess —imagine all the private scenes, the quarrels, the happinesses, the moments of excitement & change, as they grew up. And now, rather sublimely she

ends her childhood years in a studio alone, going back, perhaps rather sadly to the life she would have liked best of all once, to be a painter on her own. So we have made out our lives, she 6k I, propelled into them by some queer force; for me, I always think of those curious long autumn walks with which we ended a summer holiday, talking of what we were going to do—'autumn plans' we called them. They always had reference to painting 6k writing 6k how to arrange social life 6k domestic life better. Often we thought about changing a room, so as to have somewhere to see our own friends. They were always connected with autumn, leaves falling, the country getting pale 6k wintry, our minds excited at the prospect of lights 6k streets 6k a new season of activity beginning—October the dawn ofthe year. But I am rambling off like an old woman into the past, when as I sat down, waiting for tea, I said to myself I have so many things to write in my diary.
Another of those curious plums, things falling unexpectedly in our way, has just happened. Annie the large eyed sad young woman has been to ask us to buy her a cottage, 6k let her do for us always, in fact be our servant here. She 6k her baby, aged two, have been turned out at a fortnights notice to make room for two spinster dog breeders. Humanity says we ought to buy her her cottage, 6k take no rent—let her work it off. Another £350,6k repairs—more articles. She would make an ideal servant, I believe; she would be a great standby; one could come here as long as one liked—6k poor dear Nelly could be left in London,—for she gave notice again this morning, to Leonard this time, about his coal scuttle. It seems we are settling 6k rooting almost daily. I should have to dismiss poor spindly Bartholomew. It needs some thinking—meanwhile Annie is up against this terrific high black prison wall of poverty—has to manage with a child on 15/- a week.
These reflections, which branch off down so many paths make me linger, over the two other records—Peter, 6k my future, which I thought I was going to write; but it is tea time, 6k then I want to wander off up the downs or along the river, straightening my ideas.
Please God nobody comes to tea. Yet Lytton 6k Antony Blunt 6k Peter are all at Charleston.8 Please God I say these delightful 6k divine people dont come 6k make me concentrate again all in my face 6k brain. I want to swim about in the dark green depths. By the way last night in the Evening Standard James Laver called me a great writer "nobody need seek to

qualify the greatness of Miss Virginia Woolf"—hah! I hope Arnold Bennett sees that.9
Sunday 22 September
And it is ten minutes past ten in the morning, & I am not going to write a word. I have resolved to shut down my fiction for the present. My head aches too easily at the moment; I feel The Moths a prodigious weight which I can't lift yet. And yet, so odd a thing is the mind, I am never easy, at this early hour, merely reading or writing letters. Those occupations seem too light & diffused. Hence, though write letters I will & must— to Dotty, to Gerald Brenan, to peevish Eddy, I will canter here a moment. Tt is a fine September morning; the rooks cawing, the shadows very long & shallow on the terrace. The body has gone out ofthe air. It is thinning itself for winter. It is becoming pale & pure like the eyes of an old man. An exacting & rather exhausting summer this has been. What with going to London, going to Worthing & having people here, I have never settled in; I feel I should like to stay on & avoid London for a time. The car makes us almost too movable. On the other hand, this is the best appointed summer we have ever had. Never has the garden been so lovely—all ablaze even now; dazzling one's eyes with reds & pinks & purples & mauves: the carnations in great bunches, the roses lit like lamps. Often we go out after dinner to see these sights. And at last I like looking about the drawing room. I like my rug; my carpet; my painted beams. And for some odd reason I have found lovelier walks this year than ever—up into the downs behind Telscombe. Partly it is the weather, perhaps; we have had day after day of cloudless warm sun; the sky has been blue day after day; the sun has gone down clean, clear, leaving no feathers or battlements in the west. And lying out here I have seen the sun rise, & the moon shining one night like a slice of looking glass, with all the stars rippling & shining; & one night I had that curious feeling of being very young, travelling abroad, & seeing the leaves from a train window, in Italy—I cant get the feeling right now. All was adventure & excitement.
As for Peter, how right how charming how good he is!—but damn it

all, what an uninteresting mind, intellectually. I cant put my finger on it, but nothing remains in one's mind after seeing him, nothing interesting, no suggestion. Incessant similes, perpetual quotation; he sees life with great ardour through books. And then he is now all agog to copulate, which makes his stories centre round that fascinating subject too inevitably —copulation & King's College Cambridge. He went through the war, & has had 4 years of battle & blood & wounds, & yet his mind keeps the virginal simplicity ofa girls; he has the rigidity, at 36, ofa crusted college character. I suppose the mixture is not very rich in him—thats all: father a schoolmaster, mother a housekeeper, life in the suburbs, scholarships &c: that was his upbringing; & then coming out of his shell, he deliberately vowed to be pagan, to be individual, to enjoy life, to explore his own sensations when there wasn't much matter to go on. Hence the repetition, the egotism, the absence of depth or character; but I feel all this far more when he writes than in talk. In talk his charm & niceness, his integrity, his brightness, all make him a very nice, dear, delightful, memorable (yes, but not interesting) human being. He will marry; he will become Prof. of Engl. Lit. at Camb.
Wednesday 2S September
But what interests me is of course my oil stove.10 We found it here last night on coming back from Worthing. At this moment it is cooking my dinner in the glass dishes perfectly I hope, without smell, waste, or confusion: one turns handles, there is a thermometer. And so I see myself freer, more independent—& all one's life is a struggle for freedom— able to come down here with a chop in a bag & live on my own. I go over the dishes I shall cook—the rich stews, the sauces. The adventurous strange dishes with dashes of wine in them. Of course Leonard puts a drag on, & I must be very cautious, like a child, not to make too much noise playing. Nelly goes on Friday & so I shall [have] a whole week to experiment in—to become free in.
Yesterday morning I made another start on The Moths, but that wont be its title. & several problems cry out at once to be solved. Who thinks it? And am I outside the thinker? One wants some device which is not a trick.
The greenhouse began to be built yesterday. We are watering the earth with money. Next week my room will begin to rise. It strikes me that one is absurd to expect good temper or magnanimity from servants, considering what crowded small rooms they live in, with their work all about them.

Then, old Mrs. Woolf—(I mean I am making a few notes, heaven knows why, but one always thinks there is a reason.) She has come to wear a charm & dignity to me, unknown before, now her old age is crumbling down all the cheerful sentimental small talk—she becomes curiously more humane & wise, as old women are; so pliable, so steeped in life that they seem to become philosophic, & more mistress ofthe art of living than much cleverer people. So many many things have happened before her; illnesses, births, quarrels, troubles—nothing much surprises her, or long upsets her. True she is peevish & bored as a child; but has attained some carelessness of show & pomp & respectability, as if she had washed her hands of most things & were playing on a beach, rather an enviable old age in many ways, though intolerable too. Always take opportunities I heard her murmuring to Pinka who had eaten all our soup. And then the long stories about her cooks, & how she had taught them cooking when she was rich. 'Now you are poor & plain' one of them wrote 'after my great sorrow' here she sighs, & would cry, but is easily diverted & presses a tin of toffee on me.
I must go into the kitchen to see my stove cooking ham now
Wednesday 2 October
We have just been over Annie's cottage—so I suppose it is. & we therefore own another fair sized house; but the arrangement with Annie seems another of those plums which since this time, or August, last year, have dropped into our hands here. She will cook; my oil stove makes hot        ^^^
meals practicable at all hours; but I am dazed with the Brighton conference; hearing Henderson orate & seeing him get red slowly like a lobster; we went on Monday too (how my days of reflection have dwindled! one must
give it all up now) & heard a good, interesting, debate.1 The audience      M____
makes an extraordinary baaing noise; not talk, not footsteps—& I thought
how politics was no longer an affair of great nobles & mystery & diplomacy,         ^™
but of commonsense, issuing from ordinary men & women of business—
not very exalted, but straight forward, like any other business affair.
The light is dying; I hear the village boys kicking footballs; & all those reflections, comments, that occur to me walking are died out—the atmosphere, winter, change, London's imminence, scatter, finally, my poor efforts at solid concentration. Yet I have, these last days, set my book
The Labour Party annual conference opened in the Dome, Brighton, on Monday, 30 September, when the main debate was on Family Allowances. On Wednesday, 2 October, the Foreign Secretary Arthur Henderson gave a survey of Government policy in foreign affairs.

alight I think—got it going; but at a rate like that of Jacob's Room Mrs Dalloway days—a page at most, & long sitting sucking my pen. And all the Americans write & cable for articles. And I shall go in & read Phedre, having picked some apples. Leonard in the cold windy road is cleaning the car.
L W  packed up and drove to London on Thursday j October, leaving VW at Monks House; he returned on Saturday, when Maynard and Lydia Keynes came to tea, and they both drove back to Tavistock Square on Sunday afternoon, 6 October.
Friday 11 October
And I snatch at the idea of writing here in order not to write Waves or Moths or whatever it is to be called. One thinks one has learnt to write quickly; & one hasn't. And what is odd, I'm not writing with gusto or pleasure: because ofthe concentration. I am not reeling it off; but sticking it down. Also, never, in my life, did I attack such a vague yet elaborate design; whenever I make a mark I have to think of its relation to a dozen others. And though I could go on ahead easily enough, I am always stopping to consider the whole effect. In particular is there some radical fault in my scheme? I am not quite satisfied with this method of picking out things in the room & being reminded by them of other things. Yet I cant at the moment devise anything which keeps so close to the original design & admits of movement.
Hence, perhaps, these October days are to me a little strained & surrounded with silence. What I mean by this last word I dont quite know, since I have never stopped 'seeing' people—Nessa & Roger, the Jeffers', Charles Buxton, & should have seen Lord David & am to see the Eliots— oh & there was Vita too.2 No; its not physical silence; its some inner loneliness—interesting to analyse if one could. To give an example—I was walking up Bedford Place is it—the straight street with all the boarding houses this afternoon, & I said to myself spontaneously, something like this. How I suffer, & no one knows how I suffer, walking up this street,

engaged with my anguish, as I was after Thoby died—alone; fighting something alone. But then I had the devil to fight, & now nothing. And when I come indoors, it is all so silent—1 am not carrying a great rush of wheels in my head— Yet I am writing—oh & we are very successful—& there is—what I most love—change ahead. Yes, that last evening at Rodmell when Leonard came down against his will to fetch me, the Keynes's came over. And Maynard is giving up the Nation, & so is Hubert, & so no doubt shall we.3 And it is autumn; & the lights are going up; & Nessa is in Fitzroy Street—in a great misty room, with flaring gas 6k unsorted plates & glasses on the floor,—& the Press is booming—& this celebrity business is quite chronic—& I am richer than I have ever been— & bought a pair of earrings today—& for all this, there is vacancy & silence somewhere in the machine. On the whole, I do not much mind; because, what I like is to flash & dash from side to side, goaded on by what I call reality. If I never felt these extraordinarily pervasive strains— of unrest, or rest, or happiness, or discomfort—I should float down into acquiescence. Here is something to fight: & when I wake early I say to myself, Fight, fight. If I could catch the feeling, I would: the feeling ofthe singing ofthe real world, as one is driven by loneliness & silence from the habitable world; the sense that comes to me of being bound on an adventure; of being strangely free now, with money & so on, to do anything. I go to take theatre tickets (The Matriarch) & see a list of cheap excursions hanging there, & at once think that I will go to Stratford on Avon Mob fair tomorrow—why not?—or to Ireland, or to Edinburgh for a week end.4 I daresay I shant. But anything is possible. And this curious steed, life; is genuine— Does any of this convey what I want to say?—But I have not really laid hands on the emptiness after all.
Its odd, now I come to think of it—I miss Clive.
It occurs to me that Arthur Studd was another of the brilliant young men.5 But there was something innocent about him, compared with

Bernard & Geoffrey: he spoke through his nose, & had a soft guttural voice; & a bald forehead, & rather handsome brown eyes, like a dogs: he was canine, in some ways; travelled, distinguished, rich; with a stout mother he disliked, & thus won my mother's sympathy. He had thick red hands, but painted in the manner of Whistler—gesticulating over the canvas, 6k then producing some little pleasing melodious still life, with which, rather mystically, he was very pleased. It was 'being an artist' that took his fancy. He had lovely rooms in Cheyne Walk; & the white girls & pink clouds & rivers & fireworks of Whistler hung in them. He went to Samoa, to paint Whistlers perhaps, & came back when Stella was dead & grieved for her I think. He had loved her, in his fumbling ineffective way. Then he wrote little poems, about Eton, which he loved, & hoped to be buried there— But why should he think of being buried, with all his advantages? There was something ineffective about him—he could not do anything; but had, to us as children, a kind of romance; was supposed to do extravagant impossible things—like hiring a cab & taking us all off suddenly to play cricket at Lords—that I remember. I suppose he was the flower of Eton & the 90ties, getting itself varnished with art & Paris 6k studio life, 6k Chelsea. He sent me a post card from St Ives once, 6k a poem about Eton—6k then—clap came the war; 6k being endlessly kind 6k generous 6k inefficient, no doubt he did great things for refugees, 6k died, without any notice being taken, that I am aware of—a rich bachelor; not much over 501 suppose. Another 'young man'—not brilliant exactly, but congenial in my memory, modest, fresh, unexpected, 6k always so nasal.
Sunday 13 October
It comes to me to ask, how far could I live at this moment in Nessa being with Angelica at school? Can one supplement one's life? I think a little. Julian has driven her over from Cambridge, this still soft grey morning. It is sunny 6k misty in the country. She got into the car in the King's Parade, where the paper sellers are 6k the young men are hurrying I suppose along to breakfast. Then they drive, with a map on their knees; Julian rather tense, staring through his spectacles. Some very intimate things are hinted at—of wh. I know nothing—or rather he grunts 6k half says things, which she understands. She is very excited, at the same time practical. Julian is excited too. They are both very anxious to see Angelica. How will they see her first? She will come running down the stairs into the private room, on the left; with the Adams fireplace. And then? She will 'fly into Nessa's arms'. Nessa will hold her very tight to get the sensation of her child's body again. Julian will call her "dear". They will go

out together into the park. Angelica will like to show off her knowledge of rules & ways & the best places to sit in; other girls will smile, & she will say 'Thats Claudia* or Annie. Thats Miss Colly—Thats Mrs Curtis. And all the time they will be feeling the comfort & excitement of being together—of having only just broached their time together. Nessa will get at ever so many things: questions of happiness, teaching, liking, loneliness—change. They will be very proud of each other & aloof. & Julian will peer about, through his glasses, liking Nessa & Angelica better than anybody I daresay; the simple crude boy—whom I shall now never know, I daresay. For—as I am going to say to Nessa on Wednesday— you are a jealous woman, & dont want me to know your sons, dont want to take, but always to give; are afraid ofthe givers. What will she answer? But Leonard will go on moving the apples, 6k so I cannot write anything except my—what I am pleased to call—my diary. I wish I could write more succinctly, by the way, & with less use of the present participle. My carelessness shocks me. Nature is having her revenge, & is now making me write one word an hour.
Wednesday 23 October
As it is true—I write only for an hour—then sink back feeling I cannot keep my brain on that spin any more—then typewrite, & am done by 12— I will here sum up my impressions before publishing a Room of One's t                                Own.6 It is a little ominous that Morgan wont
e wro e yes er ay revjew jt * jt makes me suspect that there is a very much liked it shrill feminine tone in it which my intimate friends will dislike. I forecast, then, that I shall get no criticism, except of the evasive jocular kind, from Lytton, Roger & Morgan; that the press will be kind & talk of its charm, 6k sprightiness; also I shall be attacked for a feminist 6k hinted at for a sapphist; Sibyl will ask me to luncheon; I shall get a good many letters from young women. I am afraid it will not be taken seriously. Mrs Woolf is so accomplished a writer that all she says makes easy reading . . . this very feminine logic ... a book to be put in the hands of girls. I doubt that I mind very much. The Moths; but I think it is to be waves, is trudging along; 6k I have that to refer to, if I am damped by the other. It is a trifle, I shall say; so it is, but I wrote it with ardour 6k conviction.
We dined last night with the Webbs, 6k I had Eddy 6k Dottie to tea.

As for these mature dinner parties one has some friendly easy talk with one man—Hugh Macmillan—about the Buchans 6k his own career;—the Webbs are friendly but can't be influenced about Kenya:7 we sit in two lodging house rooms (the dining room had a brass bedstead behind a screen) eat hunks of red beef; 6k are offered whisky. It is the same enlightened, impersonal, perfectly aware of itself atmosphere. "My little boy shall have his toy"—but dont let that go any further "—that's what my wife says about my being in the Cabinet". No they have no illusions. And I compared them with L. 6k myself, 6k felt (I daresay for this reason) the pathos, the symbolical quality of the childless couple; standing for something, united.
As for 'seeing' Eddy 6k Dottie, there is not much to it; an occasional phrase one remembers—Eddy's being in love with two people: Dotty's rational account of a bore whom she helps: Eddy wishes me to read his diary, but some, nameless, friend objects; but he agreed, before long: it is a gratification to him. And so 1 \ hours passed. Dotty deplored Vita's too early fame. Yet I suppose she loves her; is devoted; queer things lodge in people's souls;
I am very carefully 6k cautiously becoming a reader 6k a thinker again. Since I have been back I have read Virginia Water (a sweet white grape); God; —all founded, 6k teased 6k spun out upon one quite simple 6k usual psychological experience; but the man's no poet 6k cant make one see; all his sentences are like steel lines on an engraving;8 I am reading Racine, have bought La Fontaine, 6k so intend to make my sidelong approach to French literature, circling 6k brooding—
Saturday 2 November
It takes precisely 10 days for anything to happen to a book—It is now Saturday 2nd. Nov: 6k the R. of ones O. has sold, I think ioo copies

this morning; none before, or scarcely any, this largely due to Vita's flamboyant broadcast. And I cant remember all the things I was intending to say,— like Renard—the man who kept a diary of the things that occur to
one.1
I dreamt last night that I had a disease of the heart that would kill me in 6 months. Leonard, after some persuasion, told me. My instincts were all such as I should have, in order, & some very strong: quite unexpected, I mean voluntary, as they are in dreams, & have thus an authenticity which makes an immense, & pervading impression. First, relief—well I've done with life anyhow (I was lying in bed) then horror; then desire to live; then fear of insanity; then (no this came earlier) regret about my writing, & leaving this book unfinished; then a luxurious dwelling upon my friends sorrow; then a sense of death & being done with at my age; then telling Leonard that he must marry again; seeing our life together; & facing the conviction of going, when other people went on living. Then I woke, coming to the top with all this hanging about me; 6k found I had sold a great many copies of my book; & was asked to lunch by Madame Kallas2 —the odd feeling of these two states of life & death mingling as I ate my breakfast feeling drowsy & heavy.
[Tuesday 5 November]
Oh but I have done quite well so far with R. of one's Own: 6k it sells, I think; & I get unexpected letters. But I am more concerned with my Waves. I've just typed out my mornings work; & can't feel altogether sure. There is something there (as I felt about Mrs Dalloway) but I can't get at it, squarely; nothing like the speed & certainty of The Lighthouse: Orlando mere childs play. Is there some falsity, of method, somewhere? Something tricky?—so that the interesting things aren't firmly based? I am in an odd state; feel a cleavage; here's my interesting thing; & there's no quite solid table on which to put it. It might come in a flash, on re-reading —some solvent. I am convinced that I am right to seek for a station whence I can set my people against time & the sea—but Lord, the difficulty of Egging oneself in there, with conviction. Yesterday I had conviction; it has gone today. Yet I have written 66 pages in the past month.

Yesterday Sibyl came; & I told her that she was like a bird holding a stinking mouse in its claws—6k the mouse was life. She admitted it. She said she had to go through an unpleasant business; was going to Paris this morning; would     ^he unpleasant business
tell me of it afterwards. Then she bemoaned        s      ., e ,       ernes
11                1   11    1          111                               egg—said t0 De ^5°)0O0>
her lot, guardedly; how she had grown up so     in ArneriCa. Now gives
late, & only now began to see what it was she    tea parties only wanted. I gather that it is intimacy, simplicity,
& friendship that she wants; & it is a little late in life to demand them; & how can she get them now, needing £20,000 a year too? So Arthur cant retire; they must sit there & see the season through; she cant, at the moment, master life; it is not a dead mouse after all; but wriggles. She looked ringeyed, puckered—I saw her in a flash, quite old. Her eyes were very tragic.
And today Stephen Tennant comes to tea.3 6k Arthur Waley. On Sunday we were at Rodmell; 6k my room is now about three feet of brick, with the window frames in; rather an eyesore, for it cuts off the garage roof 6k the downs—both pleasanter sights than I had thought. They have driven a small hole through the little room, for the passage; so that by this time, no doubt, that is in being. 6k things fall 6k rise 6k disappear 6k re-appear. And most of my joy was turned to rage because I let Southease sale of furniture slip, 6k could have furnished my room perfectly for £20 I daresay. Such is one's life—yes, such: (a convenient phrase;) And I am asked daily to lecture; 6k L.'s freedom draws near. Wright will inherit, 6k is making his dispositions.4 I keep saying "We shall be able to do that when you have left the Nation". Still, you see what with oil stoves 6k Annie, battling my way to freedom. Jan. ist is the day. We have had the Nation for nearly seven years, without making it blood 6k bone of ours, as once I thought possible. A tepid paper; neither this nor that, with the perpetual drag of Hubert 6k Harold, Hubert kindly incompetent, Harold competent but to me, all wood, red apple, sawdust, plausibility, respectability, hesitation 6k compromise.

Sunday 17 November
A horrid date. Yes, I am feeling a little sick, a little shivery; I cant settle to anything; I am in a twitter; I try to read Mauron—to write—& my lips begin forming words; I begin muttering long conversations between myself & Vita about Dotty on the telephone; about Miss Matheson: I act parts: I find myself talking aloud; I say things over & over again like this "I want to know if after what happened the other morning you want to give me notice? . . . Well, then, as you wont answer, I am afraid I must now give you notice ... But I want to explain exactly why it is. After you told me to leave your room I went to Mr Woolf & said that I could not keep you as my maid any longer. But I haven't made up my mind in a hurry. I have been thinking about it since June. I tried to arrange not to order dinner so that we might avoid scenes. But the scenes at Rodmell were worse than ever. And now this is the last. I am afraid I can't go on with it. This is the 17th of Nov. I shall expect you to go on the 17th Dec." Yes, this is what I have to say to Nelly at 9.30 tomorrow, & then I go to Mrs Hunt's [Domestic Agency], And I am almost trembling with this nervous anticipation as I write. But it must be done.
Monday 18 November
Well it is over, & much better than I expected—at least for the present. To my question Do you want to give me notice? she replied "I have given you notice— . ." Further argument was attempted & cut short by me. "Then you wish to go at the end of your month—12th December." "As we refused her an hours extra help when she was ill, yes." But this was said without conviction. I clinched it by looking at the calendar (which I could not see, blind as I am) & then left her, in the calmest flattest way possible—which means I'm afraid that she has no more intention of going on Dec. 12th than I have of taking ship to Siberia. So be it. My mind is like a gum when an aching tooth has been drawn. I am having a holiday— reading old Birrell5, & shall hope that the dust will be settled now for a Week or two. The Horsham tiles are being put on my roof, so Percy writes this morning; which means that my rooms must be almost done. And now I have an extra room there—Nelly's—yes; & no servant in the house

here—thank God—two friends to come in one early t'other late; no more Bloomsbury gossip—no more Lottie barging in & out; no more fear of having people to lunch & tea & dinner; no more pains in the back, swollen ankles, & ups & downs of passion & effusion. And so, what with the oil stove, Annie, giving up the Nation, new rooms new servants, the new year will be one of the most interesting—a great advance towards freedom which is the ideal state of the soul. Yet it must not be thought that I have suffered acutely from servitude. My one claim on my own gratitude is that, directly I feel a chain, I throw it off: think of leaving Fitzroy; leaving Hogarth—leaving Hyde Park Gate I was going to say to round the sentence & indeed I think I have been an old struggler after my fashion— not so valiant I daresay as Nessa, but tenacious too & bold.
Monday z5 November
I merely add idly (ought I not to be correcting To the Lighthouse6) that the difficulties with Nelly are to avoid an apology. She has weakened, & is now all out to catch us weakening. She wished L. many happy returns this morning. She came to me on Friday & asked me why I did not speak. I had some difficulty in being stiff & angry & saying that after her behaviour & accusations it was impossible. Mrs Hunt promises an abundance of permanent dailies, & so I think the die is cast. I have no doubt difficulties will begin, again; but not the old intolerable difficulties, no, no, never again.
I broadcast; & poured my rage hot as lava over Vita. She appeared innocent—I mean of telling H[ilda] M[atheson]. that I could easily cut my Brummell to bits.7 And then 1 discussed her friends, Vita's friends, & said that here, in their secondrateness, was the beginning of my alienation. I cant have it said "Vita's great friends—Dottie, Hilda & Virginia". I detest the 2ndrate schoolgirl atmosphere. She sat silent for the most part, & only said I was right. Harold had said the same. The thing to do is to check it. She cant stop what she's begun. And then in a hurry to Rodmell, where the roof is on, & the floor stretched with planks. The bedroom will be a lovely wonderful room what I've always hoped for.

Saturday 30 November
I fill in this page, nefariously; at the end of a morning's work. I have begun the second part of Waves—I dont know, I dont know. I feel that I am only accumulating notes for a book—whether I shall ever face the labour of writing it, God Knows. From some higher station I may be able to pull it together—at Rodmell, in my new room. Reading The Lighthouse does not make it easier to write; nor these impending final interviews with Nelly & new servants. We had a party—dining out at the Red Lion— last night; Julian & Rachel; Lyn, Hope, Plomer, Brian Howard, Nessa afterwards. Too many people, Leonard said. I dont know. I dislike B. Howard; I dislike his decadence, & protruding eyes, & unbuttoned waistcoat & floating tie.8 On the make, Leonard says. Plomer, on the other hand, was very plump & vigorous, fresh from the Bayswater murder; the details of which he said—how he had cleaned scraps of brain from the carpet apparently—could not be told.9 The young Jewess was attacked in bed at 4 last Sunday morning by a mad husband with a razor. First he locked the door, so that she banged & kicked, with the razor slashing her all the time in vain: at last burst out, with her head hanging by the skin to die on the landing. If William had not been away that week end the Chinese man would have come to him; & he thinks, killed him too. But this is not his line, he says as a novelist; & the psychic ladies who invest the house, like the coarser kind of bug & beetle, disgust him with their sea-ants. They table turn, & hear the voice of Mrs Frip—(not her name) from the other side; one, very fat with curled hair, said, "And it all happened a million years ago." Disgusting, William said. His eyes—the representative part of him—flashed & goggled.
It is said that Hope has become a Roman Catholic on the sly. Certainly she has grown very fat—too fat for a woman in middle age who uses her brains, & so I suspect the rumour is true. She has sat herself down under the shade. It is strange to see beauty—she had something elegant & individual—go out, like a candle flame. Julian, for instance, could not see,

I think, that Hope had ever been a young & attractive woman. She has some vigour of mind though. Lyn has less than I could wish. When she has written her review, there is not much left. And her 'niceness'— housekeeping & nursing her sister who is ill—take the edge off. Had she £100, she would insure against illness, she said; because illness means that one cant work; this week, neither she nor her sister has made a penny. On that foundation it is hard to rear any very robust character; she is fretted & anxious.
Certainly it is true that if one writes a thing down one has done with it.
Saturday 30 November
It is still Saturday the 30th November, & we have been to Greenwich, leaving Nessa & Duncan to paint Dottie's tables in Mr James' shed.10 Mr James is one of the Morris craftsmen; & has a tile making works near the river. He wears striped trousers & spats & will sit up all night, indulging himself with cups of tea, when the tiles are firing. Now & then you take out a tile to test it. He has three Kilns, the most expensive costing £300: & the Rotherhithe tunnel is near at hand. Leonard & I walked under the river (I thinking ofthe pressure of grey water round it; & ofthe absurd sublimity of errand boys & nursemaids walking on dry land under the river) & we came up in Greenwich & walked there on the parade where I walked a year or two ago in a temper. A man in a jersey was sitting in a glass shelter. How odd—to sit there, with nothing to do! And we saw the hospital, yellow & pink; & then it rained, & we went back & talked to Mr James about his tiles & then drove through the East End to the garage. I bought two crumpets for a penny; & we came home. Duncan began telling me the story of the London artists; & how Roger is so much hated by the critics that they wont notice the London artists. This is said to mean that Keith Baynes doesn't sell. And so Nessa is having a tea party tomorrow to discuss the matter with Porter & Keith Baynes. For this she bought some cakes. And they are having Angus to dinner. So am I not thank God.11

Sunday 8 December
Dear me; last Monday, as L. advised, I asked Nelly if she wished to go: & so (as I foreboded) she said reasonably no; & proposed solutions; we were landed; not emotionally, rather weariedly, & disillusionedly on my part, in a compromise: to try Mansfield for a month,—(here is L. to ask about alterations—that is a 2nd E.C. & new lavatory basin which being settled—& its a roaring wind) we (then) if the trial is unsatisfactory then to part without further discussion for ever.1
Just back from Rodmell. The roof is on; the floors are made; the windows in; giving, it seemed vast sweeping views of flooded meadows; but there was only a blink of light even at midday; we were engulfed in whirling wet; working up to such a storm on Friday night as I have, I think, never been in. It went round & round; & there was thunder in the crash of the wind; & great zigzags of lightning; & hail drumming on the iron roof outside my room; & such a fury of noise one could not sleep. So at one I went up to L. & looked at the lighted windows in the village; & thought, really with some fear, of being out alone that moment. Suppose the tree crashed, or the slates came off? We were not very securely sheltered, there under our slate roof; still better than being at sea. Dreams were all blown about, elongated, distorted, that night. A tree down in the churchyard. Trees down all the way up today. A curious sense of community brought by the storm. A man killed at Chailey sleeping in a shed; a woman at Eastbourne; a boy at Worthing. However, the mind was very still & happy. I read & read & finished I daresay 3 foot thick of MS read carefully too; much of it on the border, & so needing thought. Now, with this load despatched, I am free to begin reading Elizabethans—the little unknown writers, whom I, so ignorant am I, have never heard of, Puttenham, Webb, Harvey.2 This thought fills me with joy—no overstatement. To begin reading with a pen in my hand, discovering, pouncing, thinking of theories, when the ground is new, remains one of my great excitements. Oh but L.

will sort apples, & the little noise upsets me; I cant think what I was going to say.
So I stopped writing, by which no great harm was done; & made out a list of Elizabethan poets.                                                                          ^
And I have, with great happiness, refused to write Rhoda Broughton & Ouida for de la Mare. That vein, popular as it is, witness Jane & Geraldine, is soon worked out in me. I want to write criticism. Yes, & one might make out an obscure figure or two. It was the Elizabethan prose writers I loved first & most wildly, stirred by Hakluyt, which father lugged home for me—I think of it with some sentiment—father tramping over the Library with his little girl sitting at HPG in mind. He must have been 65; I 15 or 16, then; & why I dont know, but I became enraptured, though not exactly interested, but the sight of the large yellow page entranced me. I used to read it & dream of those obscure adventurers, & no doubt practised their style in my copy books. I was then writing a long picturesque essay upon the Christian religion, I think; called Religio Laid, I believe, proving that man has need ofa God; but the God was described in process of change; & I also wrote a history of Women; & a history of my own    /
Tuesday 10 December
A bad day yesterday, because I had Vita to lunch, which I hate, & lost one of my green leather gloves. We had tea with Leonard's mother, who, sitting in a new room, fairly flabbergasted us by her accident. The hotel was struck by lightning on Friday; a chimney stack fell; her room was filled with soot & sparks—& there she was, dramatising it, shivering, shocked, yet buoyant & secretly pleased to be the centre of catastrophe again. As usual she had behaved with perfect calm—"but I feel these things so much afterwards" & was anxious to give pounds of tobacco to the workmen engaged in mending the roof. "What right, I said to myself, have we to sit here & see those poor fellows carrying bricks? Oh their lives—carrying bricks to the roof in this gale—& I sitting here" (in a pink hotel bedroom). This is her fluid imagination—pounds of tobacco, as Harold [Woolf] said, wdn't do much to cure the social system.4
It is I think a proof of the pressure at which we live that I have said

nothing of our lawsuit—or have I? against the hotel, against the jazz band.5 Rachel, William Plomer & ourselves go to court on Friday. Why are the facts so intolerably dull? I shrink from writing them. I rather liked Scadding & Bodkin's office; & swearing by almighty God; but Rachel & Wm. enjoy it more than I do. It is more unexpected. Rachel will tell her friends about it—as I should have done. But whole days knocked out of the week bore me. I feel that my greatest triumph is to achieve a quiet evening—in which to read El[izabe]thans. And Charlie Sanger is very ill—I figure him lying worn out, worn out & without much solid happiness to show for it; like some old gold link—so good, so genuine; affectionate; honourable; but a worn disappointed man I think: no natural happiness: a conscience; & then Dora.
Thursday 12 December
Here, just back from Rodmell, & some rather forced conversation with Mr Philcox (the wife & I went to America—I dont like America—you pay separate for breakfast—room, double 24 dollars). I will rapidly note my evidence for tomorrow though Pritchard now says we shall be postponed—for the hotel cant get a witness. What I shall say—(I have the pump all right,) is this about the autumn.
We came back early in October & the music was very bad. My husband
^          ,  ,                   wrote to the Secretary who wrote & assured him
Case settled: expenses        ,             , .        , . *.        XT       .11
paid: 15th Jan. (about)    that everything wd. be done. Next night the muslc was so bad that my husband rang up the hotel;
but they said they could do nothing. The music slightly improved, & we
waited till the end of Nov. when it became so bad we were unable to sit
in the room. The party was on 29th: on the 30th it was intolerable.
How easily facts escape me!
Saturday 14 December
No I am too tired to write; have been rushed, what with the lawsuit &c; have had toothache: & so sit passive, hoping that some drops will form in my mind. By the way, the sales of A Room are unprecedented— have beaten Orlando; feels like a line running through ones fingers; orders

for 100 taken as coolly as 12's used to be. We have sold, I think 5500; & our next years income is made.
Had I married Lytton I should never have written anything. So I thought at dinner the other night. He checks & inhibits in the most curious way. L. may be severe; but he stimulates. Anything is possible with him. Lytton was mild & damp, like a wet autumnal leaf. Lonely, & growing elderly; so he compares notes with Clive apparently. Our case stands over till next Thursday, & will probably be settled in the interval—some compromise made. Yesterday they screwed down some windows—the law had that instant effect. The law was sad-coloured, impressive. We saw Mr Preston at 10; he was in a black court coat, with dirty white bands; a self confident sandy, polite man. What a pugnacious chap you are! I heard another K.C. say to him in court. An admirable manly atmosphere— schoolboys come to responsibility they seemed; all so aquiline & definite under their frizzled grey wigs. Then the Judge (Farwell) came in. We rose. He bowed. He looked superhumanly sage, dignified, sad; the wig again cutting his forehead off& accentuating the deep reflective eyes—a sallow, sodden wearied face; so intent that he was monosyllabic—could not afford to open his mouth unnecessarily; merely nodded. All was over in io minutes I suppose. I felt the stress of it all; that man sitting there intent under his canopy in the small crowded court, never dropping a word, till 4 in the afternoon.6
Sunday 15 December
Tooth better, but not what I call a vigorous head; an idling, unconcen-trated head—too much doing in Tavistock Sqre these last days. Last night we went to The Calendar (by Edgar Wallace) with Ann; & there was a cheer, & behold a great golden Queen bowing in a very small bow windowed box.7 Also, when the lights went up, the King, red, grumpy, fidgeting with his hands; well groomed, bluff; heavy looking, with one white flower in his buttonhole, resenting the need, perhaps, of sitting to be looked at between one of the acts—his duty to be done; & then not

much liking the little remarks cast at him, to minimise his labour, by the Queen. Once the D[uche]ss of York sat with the Queen; a simple, chattering, sweethearted little roundfaced young woman in pink: but her wrist twinkling with diamonds, her dress held on the shoulder with diamonds. The Queen also like a lit up street with diamonds. An odd feeling came to me of the shop window decorated for the public: these our exhibits, our show pieces. Not very impressive—no romance or mystery—the very best goods. Yet he descends, I daresay, from Hengist; goes straight back, this heavy bluff grumpy looking man, to Elizabeth & the rest;8 will have his face forever in our history. He took spectacles out of a bright red case.
I thought (as I so often think things) of many comments to be written. One remains. If I were reading this diary, if it were a book that came my way, I think I should seize with greed upon the portrait of Nelly, 6k make a story—perhaps make the whole story revolve round that—it would amuse me. Her character—our efforts to be rid of her—our reconciliations.
The Woolfs drove to Rodmell for two weeks Christmas break on Saturday 21 December. It rained heavily; the Bells were at Seend; LW pruned the fruit trees.
[ Thursday 26 December] Rodmell. Boxing day
And I am sitting in my new room—bedroom, not sitting room; with curtains fire table; & two great views; sometimes sun over the brooks & storm over the church. A violent Christmas; a brilliant serene Boxing day; & both very happy—completely, were it not for the damnable Byng-Stamper & his power to sell the down to a syndicate to exploit. That this is his intention comes through Percy; & I am wrought up to protest; indeed I must write to Ottoline & ask her the name of the little man who protects downs. This place is always being risked & saved; & so perhaps will be again. Cutting down trees & spoiling downs are my two great iniquities—what the Armenians were to Mrs Cole.9 I find it almost

incredibly soothing—a fortnight alone—almost impossible to let oneself have it. Relentlessly we have crushed visitors—Morgan, Roger, Adrian. We will be alone this once, we say; & really, it seems possible. Then Annie is to me very sympathetic; my bread bakes well. All is rather rapt, simple, quick effective—except for my blundering on at The Waves. I write two pages of arrant nonsense, after straining; I write variations of every sentence; compromises; bad shots; possibilities; till my writing book is like a lunatic's dream. Then I trust to some inspiration on re-reading; & pencil them into some sense. Still I am not satisfied. I think there is something lacking. I sacrifice nothing to seemliness. I press to my centre. I dont care if it all is scratched out. And there is something there. I incline now to try violent shots—at London—at talk—shouldering my way ruthlessly—& then, if nothing comes of it—anyhow I have examined the possibilities. But I wish I enjoyed it more. I dont have it in my head all day like The Lighthouse & Orlando.
Before I went Clive came to tea; sat alone for an hour or two. He asked me if I had been told that he had criticised A Room? I said no. He was a little rasped; said the jokes were lecture jokes. "Girls come round me"— too much of that—little ideas—nothing to compare with Orlando. And then, inconsistently, he praised O. above L[ighthouse]. against what he said at the time. But his criticism is founded upon the theory that I cant feel sex: have the purple light cut off; & therefore must, write Orlando's not Lighthouses. I daresay there's some truth—especially in his saying that my soliloquies, trains of thought, are better than my silhouettes. But, as always, his own axe wants grinding: that Love is enough—or if love fails, down one goes for ever. For we got on Mary of course; & again he protested that no one could have acted other than he did—& then he vaguely threatened an alliance, in France, with his loved—or the lady who loves. But does she love? Does she take him to Egypt? All trembles now on some unreality. Everything has been shifted by Mary; no fundament left. And I always feel, how jolly, how much hunting, & talking & carousing there is in you! How long we have known each other—& then Thoby's form looms behind—that queer ghost. I think of death sometimes as the end of an excursion which I went on when he died. As if I should come in & say well, here you are. And yet I am not familiar with him now, perhaps. Those letters Clive read made him strange & external.10
But a dog barks, & my lamp flickers—even in my perfect room. So down to Leonard, to read Elizabethans & put our glass dish on the fire.

Saturday 28 December
Bernard Shaw said the other night at the Keynes'11—6k the Keynes's have just wrecked my perfect fortnight of silence, have been over in their Rolls Royce—6k L. made them stay, 6k is a little inclined to think me absurd for not wishing it—but then Clive is his bugbear at present— Bernard Shaw said to me, I have never written anything except poetry. A man has written a book showing how by altering a word or two a whole act ofthe D[octo]rs Dilemma is in rhythm. In fact my rhythm is so strong that when I had to copy a page of Wells the other day in the midst of my own writing my pen couldnt do it. I was wanting to write my own rhythm —yet I hadn't known till then that I had so strong a rhythm. Heartbreak House is the best of my plays. I wrote it after staying with you at the Webbs in Sussex—perhaps you inspired it.12 And Lydia is making the Lady into Queen Victoria. No I never saw Stevenson—Mrs Stevenson thought I had a cold.
You write Irish Mr Shaw. So does Mr Moore. Moore's an odd man— a very small talent cultivated with the utmost patience. We used to laugh at him in the old days. He was our butt. He was always telling us stories about himself 6k a lady—a grand lady—6k she was always throwing something at his head 6k just missing it—6k he used to say "Wait wait, there's a good passage coming". Nobody was better tempered. But he was our laughing stock. And one day Zola said to me I've discovered your great English novelist! Who's that said I. His name is George Moore. And I burst out laughing not our little George Moore, with his stories about himself? But it was. A lesson, you see, not to be too quick in judging ones friends.
But all his stories are autobiographic, I said.
Yes, they are all about George Moore 6k the lady who throws something at his head. —is writing a life of Moore 6k has asked me to tell the story of his early days. I am collecting my works. I find that I wrote a million words about the theatre. I dont know what to do with it. My wife wants me to leave out. But I think it gives a curious picture of the time. I am ashamed to think that I could ever have written so badly. The collection is limited

to 21 volumes. Theyre going to be sold in different bindings in America— some in leather very expensive—others quite cheap—hawked about all over America by peddlars. Im not a modest man but even I blushed at the stuff I've had to write for my publishers. Essential to every home 6k so on. I say out of twelve people, there will always be 3 women as clever as the men. What I've always told them is go for the governing bodies—dont mind about the vote. Insist upon representation. Now women are far more enthusiastic about business than men. They get things done. Men gossip in clubs. Oh but youve done more for us than anyone, Mr Shaw. My generation, 6k Francis Birrell's (he was sitting behind) we might be nice people, but we're different owing to you.
Happier said Francis.
Then Lydia came 6k broke in, with Mrs Shaw.


1930

Saturday 4 January
This is the new year, & I shall continue this book—from economy. I am having a holiday; it is fine; & so inveterate an habitual am I, I find it easier to walk after lunch than before. Far from doing nothing, I intend to write some letters, & have been pondering the early works of Miss Easedale.1
The idea has come to us that we will live here from April onwards. And merely because of that idea, the view from my window looks different. It becomes usual[?], something for a long unstressed time; hitherto I have always seen it as an interlude; a breathing space. I note, for that Portrait of Nelly that I should write, if I were editing these pages, that her letter to me began Dear Madam—which I hold to be as Carlyle used to say "Significant of much". But these are notes merely; for some reason it bores me to enlarge.
Vita came yesterday with a green glass tank in which Japanese flowers expand in water. Here my mind would expand like that—the advent of the Keynes' made it shrivel.2 And we wasted our fine day, that should have been spent at Rye, talking in their very ugly room. But I am not saying that they are ugly: that would be blasphemous. This perpetual denigration of human nature & adoration of solitude is suspect. Only, here I'm bound to the board, like an insect, for another three months; & my one fine day I grudge to society. Tonight we dine at Charleston 6k so home tomorrow to the pump, to the dance music; to Braithewaite, Goldie, Ottoline, Sprott & so on—to be 'seen' to 'see'. A little music though—the opera—that I shall like. And now I must answer letters & so start London free from that anyhow.

JANUARY 1930
Thursday 9 January
I merely note that I am going to try to keep next week entirely free from 'seeing' people, bating my dinner at Bogy Harrises to meet the Prime Minister, & Angelica's party. I am going to see if I can keep 7 days out of the clutch of the seers. I have arranged to do my seeing all this week, & have plodded along faithfully, & industriously: Braithewait & Miss Matthews, Dottie, Ottoline, Goldie, Sprot, Quentin, Miss Matheson & Plomer last night & Eddy to tea today, Vita tomorrow, Quentin on Saturday; & then nobody I swear on Sunday.3
Sunday 12 January
Sunday it is. And I have just exclaimed, And now I can think of nothing else. Thanks to my pertinacity & industry, I can now hardly stop making up The Waves. The sense of this came acutely about a week ago on beginning to write the Phantom, .party: now I feel that I can rush on, after 6 months hacking, & finish: but without the least certainty how its to achieve any form. Much will have to be discarded: what is essential is to write fast & not break the mood—no holiday, no interval if possible, till it is done. Then rest. Then re-write.
As for keeping a week free—I am now going to visit L.'s mother: then to the Frys after dinner. Marjorie Strachey to tea tomorrow: Duncan, I think, on Tuesday; Vita on Friday; Angelica on Saturday; Bogey Harris Wednesday: one day remains entire—Thursday—& thats the end of my week.
Thursday 16 January
A page of real life. Last night at Bogey Harrises. I came in, flung into the room in my red coat. A very painted raddled tall, pink woman (Mrs Graham Murray [unidentified]); & the rest, in an oval room, with painted ceiling, & books—"given me by Home with Ben Johnson's autograph—

the first edition of Dante— Lady Londonderry will be late; but we wont wait".4 I have forgotten the prime minister—an unimpressive man; eyes disappointing; rather heavy; middle class; no son of the people; sunk; grumpy; self-important; wore a black waistcoat; had some mediocrity of personality. In came Lady L. very late; in ruby velvet, cut to the middle of the back, small, running, quick, current, energised. All went in to dinner, & I was too blind to read Sir Robert Vansittart on the man's card, so had to jumble for my neighbours pursuit.5 Never mind. They all called each other Van, Bogey, Ramsay, Eadie, across the table; engaged in governing England: A mazer bowl fingered by Roger, drew Ramsay for two minutes, rather heavily into the open; took it; looked at it, laying his shabby drab spectacle case on the table; said he had never signed any authority for the sale of the mazer to America;6 then lapsed into tete a tete with the ladies—murmuring, unresonant. And so upstairs, Ly L. running ahead, opening doors, taking us into little rooms to look at Majolica, at altarpieces. Then round the fire she started off, fluent, agreeable, hard hitting, like a rider, or Captain, without an ounce of spare flesh, telling stories—old men who had operations & were then mad—left their money in a muddle—her own father mad for two years—Farquhar muddling up the Fife Settlements & the Liberal Party fund7—all indiscreet, open, apparently; the chat of a perfectly equipped, un nonsensical, well fed, athletic woman, riding her horse at every fence. We discussed Birth

Control. 'Dear Edie, you wont let me convert you. But when you see your miners, with those terrible illegitimate children—
Eight in a room. One bed. What can you expect? They speak straight out to me, the old fashioned ones. Cant do anything else. What would you do? What should we do, if we lived like that? But we're not beasts. We can control ourselves. I detest Prohibition for that reason.'
Swept on, energetically, confidently, to the Webbs (woman sprung up beside me like a cobra) "Our class & yours can never meet. What difference is there? But these clever people! Yeats & Lady Gregory on a committee are hopeless—but both very clever people. Cant do anything."8
Ly L. can do whatever she wishes. She looked like an early Victorian picture—a Lawrence, I thought; a small pinched well cut face; healthy; without paint; very pink, pearls knotted about her wrists. The other woman garish, like a ruined almond tree. The rooms all set out with cases, chests, pictures objects. "I never give more than £10:1 hunt about in rag & bone shops." Bogy has the glazed stuffed look ofthe well fed bachelor. Is evidently one of those elderly comfortable men of taste & leisure who make a profession of society; a perfectly instinctive snob. Knows everyone; lunches with Lord Lascelles; has taken the measure of it all exactly; nothing to say; proficient; surly; adept; an unattractive type, with all his talk of Lords & ladies, his belief in great houses; something of a gorged look, which connoisseurs have; as if he had always just swallowed a bargain. Something airless & too tidy in the house; a plethora of altar pieces. He pads about, gorged, without anything to seek for, save in old rag & bone shops; at the crest (I suppose) of his world. I suppose that this centre to one's mind—an altarpiece—is a bad one; too still & capable of acquisition. He never wants anything unattainable, I daresay: & so has feathered his nest. Roger says he has 'flair'; Roger who looks like a ravaged scavenger & lives with sardine tins & linoleum; yes, but Roger's house seems alive, with a living hand in it, manipulated, stretched. Why do interesting people never fix them down among objects (beautiful) & Duchesses (desirable). I tried, sitting on a priceless settee, picked up in Whitechapel for £10 (I never give more) to analyse my sensations. The ladies showed a perfect commercial grasp of the situation. Ramsay was tossed between them like a fish among cormorants. I had the impression that they did not rate this acquisition high; but took it as part of the days work. Ly L. had him to herself in a shaded room for an hour. Failing this, she had her claims written down to hand him.
Angelica said at the pantomime, as we watched the spangled lady dance,

"I shall never be able to dance like that but I may be able to paint like she dances."9
Sunday 26 January
I am 48: we have been at Rodmell—a wet, windy day again; but on my birthday we walked among the downs, like the folded wings of grey birds; & saw first one fox, very long with his brush stretched; then a second; which had been barking, for the sun was hot over us; it leapt lightly over a fence & entered the furze—a very rare sight. How many foxes are there in England? At night I read Lord Chaplin's life. I cannot yet write naturally in my new room, because the table is not the right height, & I must stoop to warm my hands. Everything must be absolutely what I amused to.
I forgot to say that when we made up our 6 months accounts, we found I had made about £3,020 last year—the salary of a civil servant: a surprise to me, who was content with £200 for so many years. But I shall drop very heavily I think. The Waves wont sell
more than 2,000 copies. I am stuck fast in that    " ^as so^ about 6»5°° book-Imean„>glued,to it,,likeafly on gummed    Jj** SSA'ST paper. Sometimes I am out of touch; but go on;    stop now j suppose. then again feel that I have at last, by violent
measures—like breaking through gorse—set my hands on something central. Perhaps I can now say something quite straight out; & at length; & need not be always casting a line to make my book the right shape. But how to pull it together, how to compost it—press it into one—I do not know; nor can I guess the end—it might be a gigantic conversation. The interludes are very difficult, yet I think essential; so as to bridge & also give a background—the sea; insensitive nature—I dont know. But I think, when I feel this sudden directness, that it must be right: anyhow noother form of fiction suggests itself except as arepetition at themoment.
Lord Buckmaster sat next me. I was talking to Desmond about Irene. Suddenly Ethel said leaning across,
But did you ever know Lord Tennyson? & my evening was ruined. Typical of these parties.10

Monday 10 February
Charlie Sanger died yesterday,1 the very fine cold day, when we were driving up. I feel sorry in gusts. I wish we had dined there. I shall miss some peculiar thing—loyal, worn, romantic; flowing with affection. He knew us when Thoby died; had always clasped my hand warmly, sat sparking, glittering, elfish; very sympathetic, very serious, in the right way. He had a stern view, I think; had found life hard; & envisaged its hardness for others. Yes; I have a peculiar feeling for him—can one say more? And this is the sorrow for him—feeling one will never again have that. (I cant analyse—have indeed a slight temperature, & am in two minds if it is influenza, & whether to tell Leonard, who has had it—to put off Ethel Smyth, & Nessa—to go to bed—what is the sensible thing to do?2
Sunday 16 February
To lie on the sofa for a week. I am sitting up today, in the usual state of unequal animation. Below normal, with spasmodic desire to write, then to doze. It is a fine cold day & if my energy & sense of duty persist, I shall drive up to Hampstead.3 But I doubt that I can write to any purpose. A cloud swims in my head. One is too conscious ofthe body & jolted out of the rut of life to get back to fiction. Once or twice I have felt that odd whirr of wings in the head which comes when I am ill so often—last year for example, at this time I lay in bed constructing A Room of One's Own (which sold 10,000 two days ago). If I could stay in bed another fortnight (but there is no chance of that) I believe I should see the whole of The Waves. Or of course I might go off on something different. As it is I half

incline to insist upon a dash to Cassis; but perhaps this needs more determination than I possess; & we shall dwindle on here. Pinker is walking about the room looking for the bright patch—a sign of spring. I believe these illnesses are in my case—how shall I express it?—partly mystical. Something happens in my mind. It refuses to go on registering impressions. It shuts itself up. It becomes chrysalis. I lie quite torpid, often with acute physical pain—as last year; only discomfort this. Then suddenly something springs. Two nights ago, Vita was here; & when she went, I began to feel the quality of the evening—how it was spring coming: a silver light; mixing with the early lamps; the cabs all rushing through the streets; I had a tremendous sense of life beginning; mixed with that emotion, which is the essence of my feeling, but escapes description—(I keep on making up the Hampton Court scene in The Waves —Lord how I wonder if I shall pull this book off! It is a litter of fragments so far). Well, as I was saying, between these long pauses (for I am swimmy in the head, & write rather to stabilise myself than to make a correct statement), I felt the spring beginning, & Vita's life so full & flush; & all the doors opening; & this is I believe the moth shaking its wings in me. I then begin to make up my story whatever it is; ideas rush in me; often though this is before I can control my mind or pen. It is no use trying to write at this stage. And I doubt if I can fill this white monster. I would like to lie down & sleep, but feel ashamed. Leonard brushed off his influenza in one day & went about his business feeling ill. Here am I still loafing, undressed, with Elly coming tomorrow. But as I was saying my mind works in idleness. To do nothing is often my most profitable way.
I am reading Byron: Maurois: which sends me to Childe Harold; makes me speculate.4 How odd a mixture: the weakest sentimental Mrs Hemans combined with trenchant bare vigour. How did they combine? And sometimes the descriptions in CH. are "beautiful"; like a great poet.
There are the three elements in Byron:
/ The romantic dark haired lady singing drawing room melodies to the guitar.
"Tambourgi! Tambourgi! thy 'larum afar Gives hope to the valiant, 6k promise of war;

Oh! who is more brave than a dark Suliote, In his snowy camese & his shaggy Capote" —something manufactured: a pose; silliness.
2 Then there is the vigorous rhetorical, like his prose, & good as prose.
Hereditary Bondsmen! Know ye not
Who would be free themselves must strike the blow? By their right arms the conquest must be wrought? Will Gaul or Muscovite redress ye? No! . . .
3  Then what rings to me truer, & is almost poetry.
Dear Nature is the kindest mother still!
Though always changing, in her aspect mild; (all in Canto   From her bare bosom let me take my fill, 11 of C H.)    Her never-weaned, though not her favoured child.
*    *    *
To me by day or night she ever smiled,
Though I have marked her when none other hath,
And sought her more & more, & loved her best in wrath.
4  And then there is of course the pure satiric, as in the description of
5  a London Sunday; & finally (but this makes more than three) the inevitable half assumed half genuine tragic note, which comes as a refrain, about death & the loss of friends.
All thou could have of mine, stern Death! thou hast; The parent, Friend, & now the more than Friend: Ne'er yet for one thine arrows flew so fast, And grief with grief continuing still to blend, Hath snatched the little joy that life had yet to lend.
These I think make him up; & make much that is spurious, vapid, yet very changeable, & then rich & with greater range than the other poets, could he have got the whole into order. A novelist, he might have been. It is odd however to read in his letters his prose an apparently genuine feeling about Athens: & to compare it with the convention he adopted in verse. (There is some sneer about the Acropolis). But then the sneer may have been a pose too. The truth may be that if you are charged at such high voltage you cant fit any of the ordinary human feelings; must pose; must rhapsodise; don't fit in. He wrote in the Inn Album that his age was 100. And this is true, measuring life by feeling.

Monday 17 February
And this temperature is up;
but it has now gone down; & now
{Thursday 20 February]
Feb. 20th, I must canter my wits if I can. Perhaps some character sketches.
Snow:5
She came in wrapped in a dark fur coat; which being taken off, she appeared in nondescript grey stockinette & jay blue stripes. Her eyes too are jay blue, but have an anguished starved look, as of a cat that has climbed on to a chimney piece & looks down at a dog. Her face is pale, 6k very small; indeed, has a curious preserved innocency which makes it hard to think that she is 50. However, her neck is very loose skinned; & there are the dewlaps of middle age. The preserved look seems to indicate lack of experience; as if life had put her in a refrigerator. And we talked— She brought me a parcel, & this was a book from Ethel Smyth, with a letter, which to veil the embarrassment which I supposed her to feel, I read aloud. Her comment was "What miles away all this is from Cheltenham!" Then we talked—but it was her starved & anguished look that remains & the attitude of mind. She seemed to be saying inwardly "I have missed everything. There are Vanessa & Virginia, They have lives full of novels & husbands & exhibitions. I am fifty & it has all slipped by." I gathered this from the jocose pertinacity with which she kept referring to herself. She said the climate of Cheltenham is so sleepy that she often cant paint; & after lunch they put on the gramophone; & then she goes most days to her mother at Bockhampton, where she likes meeting the village people. Farmers wives shake hands. After her mothers death—but she is only 80 6k as firm as a rock—she 6k Lily who is political, but of course that doesn't take up all her time exactly, are going to live at Harrogate, where the climate is not so sleepy, 6k they know more people. Nothing long distracted her from her central concern—I have had no life 6k life is over. Even clothes suggested the same old theme. A dressmaker had told her that one enjoyed life more if one was well dressed. So she was

trying this specific, to the tune of £8.8 at Pomeroy's in Old Burlington Street. But this worried & fretted her too. In fact I have seldom got a more dismal impression of suffering—too ignoble & petty to be called suffering: call it rather frustration, non-entity; being lifted on a shelf, & seeing things pass; "but then I am very lazy—thats what it is—I lapse into comfort." I should call it lapsing into despair. "What can three women do alone in the country?" Lord, how I praise God that I had a bent strong enough to coerce every minute of my life since I was born! This fiddling & drifting & not impressing oneself upon anything—this always refraining & fingering & cutting things up into little jokes & facetiousness—thats whats so annihilating. Yet given little money, little looks, no special gift, but only enough to make her devastatingly aware that other people have more gift, so that she sees her still lives against the superior still lives of Margaret Gere 6k the Cotswold school,—what can one do?6 How could one battle? How could one leap on the back of life & wring its scruff? One would joke, bitterly; & become egotistical & anxious to explain & excuse; & plaintive. What I thought most pathetic was the fact that about 5.30 she began to fidget (she never does anything boldly & directly) with her gloves, & say she must be going. But where? I asked. To the Polytechnic to hear a lecture upon French literature. But why? "Oh one never hears French talked in Cheltenham." Dear dear, but I could tell you all about French literature, I said. However, she shillied shallied; & whether she wanted to go or to stay, I don't know. And when I asked her what she was going to do that night, Well that depends how long the lecture lasts, she said, feebly laughing. Wont you go to a play? No I think I shall have what is called a snack at the Temperance hotel;—Lord Lord, I repeat again. And it isn't as if she were unconscious & oblivious: no, she knows that the dog is there, & arches her back & puts out her paw, but ever so feebly & fussily.
Friday 21 February
No two women could be more extravagantly contraposed than Marjorie Snowden & Ethel Smyth. I was lying here at four yesterday when I heard the bell ring then a brisk tramp up the stairs; & then behold a bluff, military old woman (older than I expected), bounced into the room, a little glazed flyaway & abrupt; in a three cornered hat & tailor made suit.
"Let me look at you".

That over, Now I have brought a book & pencil. I want to ask.
Here there was a ring at the bell. I went to look over. Then we went to tea.
First I want to make out the genealogy of your mothers family. Old Pattle—have you a picture? No. Well now—the names of his daughters.
This lasted out tea. Afterwards, on the sofa, with Ethel stretching her legs out on Pinker's basket, we talked ceaselessly till 7—when L. came in. We talked—she talked considerably more than I. (On the stairs going up to tea I had asked to be Virginia; about ten minutes after tea she asked to be Ethel: all was settled; the basis of an undying friendship made in 15 minutes:—how sensible; how rapid;) & she got off; oh about music—"I am said to be an egoist. I am a fighter. I feel for the underdog. I rang up Hugh Allen & suggested lunch.7 My dear Sir Hugh—my dear Ethel— there are facts you dont know about your sex. Believe me I have to go on coming to London, bullying, badgering—at last, they promise me 14 women in the orchestra. I go & find 2. So I begin ringing up." She has a vein, like a large worm, in her temple which swells. Her cheeks redden. Her faded eyes flash. She has a broad rounded forehead. She recurred to dress. I have to go to Bath to hear dear Maurice Baring's little plays; & then we go to (here Elly interrupted) Rottingdean.8 And I must take an evening suit. Thats what worries me. I'm only happy in this—I have one gown I wear for conducting. And then I have to pack (here is a pineapple from Leonard's mother who waits outside). "My maid? But she's only a general—an Irish woman. "Dr (she calls me Dr) Mrs Woolf doesn't mean to see you. Heres another letter from her—to put you off." But I've come. And dont it show that my appetite for life is still great? I've thought of nothing but seeing you for 10 days. And this friendship has come to me now." So sincere & abrupt is she, & discriminating withal—judging Vita 6k her secondrate women Enid Bagnold friends shrewdly—that perhaps something gritty 6k not the usual expansive fluff, may come of it. I like to hear her talk of music. She has written a piece—on Brewster's Prisoner; 6k will have the gorgeous fun of orchestrating it this summer.9 She says writing music is like

writing novels. One thinks of the sea—naturally one gets a phrase for it. Orchestration is colouring. And one has to be very careful with one's 'technique'. Rhapsodises about A Room; about Miss Williamson;10 about the end of some book of Maurice Baring's. "I'm in the street. I belong to the crowd. I say the crowd is right." Perhaps she is right to belong to the crowd. There is something fine & tried & experienced about her besides the rant & the riot & the egotism—& I'm not sure that she is the egotist that people make out. She said she never had anybody to admire her, & therefore might write good music to the end. Has to live in the country because of her passion for games. Plays golf, rides a bicycle; was thrown hunting two years ago. Then fell on her arm & was in despair, because life wd. be over if she could not play games. 'I am very strong' which she proved by talking till 7.30; then eating a biscuit & drinking a glass of vermouth & going off to eat a supper of maccaroni when she got to Woking at 9.
"I'll tell you all about it" she grinned at her maid, who asked if I was a nice woman. A fine old creature, certainly, Ethel. She talks French 'meringues' with a highly French accent.
Saturday zz February
I had meant to write a sketch of George—Sir George Duck-worth11— as he announced himself to Nelly—& of Lytton; both unexpected visitors yesterday—for I'm not to go down to the studio till Monday; & so must canter my pen amateurishly here; but ten minutes ago the idea came to me ofa possible broadsheet; which I wd. like to adumbrate, before discussing with L. My notion is a single sheet, containing say 2,000 or if printed back & front 4,000 words. Art, politics, Lit., music: an essay by a single writer to be printed at irregular intervals; sent to subscribers; costing 6d. Sometimes only a reproduction. It should be a statement about life: something somebody wants to say; not a regular comment. Very little
which complicated an already intense relationship. Brewster had written the libretto, based on his own drama, for her opera The Wreckers, and her last large-scale work, the oratorio The Prison, took its inspiration from his metaphysical work The Prison: A Dialogue (1891), republished with a memoir by Ethel Smyth in 1930.

expense wd. be involved. It would have a spring & an urgency about it
wh. the regular sheets lack. Sometimes only a
picture. To be closely under L. & my thumbs,    And in June, I was offered
so as to give character & uniformity. To lapse    "•* Editorship of a 4ly;
for a month if necessary. No incubus of reg-    J^tSS* ^ B°"
ular appearance. A circular signed by L. & me    the Book Club: L. is
to be sent round. Young writers enlisted,    refusing it at this moment
Signed articles. Everything of the humblest,    (30th June)12
least ostentatious. The Hogarth News. The
Broadsheet.—name to be decided. You see I wd. like to write on Scott
this week, & cant, because Richmond has sent the book already.13 L. wd.
do politics. Roger art. The young would have their fling. Possibly, if
expenses were kept down, they could get £5 or so, & have their names.
But they must not be essays—always—must be topical to some extent.
That being enough to go upon in talk after lunch—& it is a fine still day & perhaps we may drive to Richmond & try my legs walking—I will obediently, like a student in the art school—sketch Sir George. First his jowl: it is ofthe finest semi-transparent flesh; so that one longs to slice it, as it rests, infinitely tender, upon his collar. Otherwise he is as tight as a drum. One expects his trousers to split as he sits down. This he does slowly & rises with difficulty. Still some sentiment begins to form misty between us. He speaks of 'Mother'. I daresay finds in me some shadowy likeness—well—& then he is not now in a position to do me harm. His conventions amuse me. I suppose these family affections are somehow self-protection. He preserves a grain or two of what is me—my unknown past; my self; so that if George died, I
should feel something of myself buried. He     See Sir George Duckworth is endlessly self-complacent.  His  stories,     on'Pigs'in todays Times.
,       11         c      11      i_    .   .          Pigs are the most intelligent
once started, roll comfortably—he is im-      c    ¦    1   t                  n
'                            f                          of animals. 1 own a small
mensely comfortable—into the pocket of    jjer(£ 0f wnjte pedigree
his solid self esteem. I ask, What about the    hogs."14
hogs (the Chesterfield hogs) & he replies
that the cowman's wife has had a very long labour. Margaret has been
very worried. Dalingridge was lit up all night. They had to use the

telephone—to send for the dr. The womans mother slept in the house— & so it goes on, singing cosily & contentedly the praises of the good master & mistress—which I have no doubt they are. And he trots out his little compliments—asked to be Sheriff. And he wishes to know if I am making fabulous sums—& he chuckles & dimples & respects me for being asked to a party by the Lord Mayor. And he twits Eddy Marsh for being fond of the society of the great. And he deplores the nudity of Nessa's pictures—& so prattles & chortles & gives me turtle soup & advises about the preparation & so takes himself off, to meet Henry & return to Dalingridge & the cowman & the hogs—a very incestuous race—& his cook Janet & his Bronnie, home on leave from the Navy— well, it does appear as if human life were perfectly tolerable; his voltage is absolutely normal. The world has been made for him.15
Lytton came in after dinner. Very twinkly, lustrous, easy & even warm. Leonard made cigarettes. I lay on the sofa in the twilight of cushions. Lytton had been sent a book about Columbus & told us the story making it into a fantastic amusing Lytton book16—Columbus a mad religious fanatic who sailed west & west because he had read in Isaiah a prophesy; his crew being convicts let out from prison; & they came to Cuba & he made them sign a statement that this was India, because it was too large to be an island; & they picked up gold & gems & went back to Spain & the King & Queen rose as he came in. Here are all the elements ofa Lytton concoction, told with great gusto; irony; a sense of the incongruous & dramatic. Then we warbled melodiously about Dadie, & Cambridge; & Charlie; & so on. He has a new gramophone. He is editing Greville.17 He is very content too—not for George's reasons; & very well equipped, & buys books; & likes us; & is going to Cambridge this week end. Its
George who was reported as saying he was 'not surprised that Mr Baldwin has always expressed a preference for die society of pigs'. Sir George wrote diat whereas townsmen were apt to speak of both farm labourers and pigs as the last word in stupidity, his considerable experience led him to conclude that the skill of the former ranked well above all other labourers', 'while die "pig" is markedly superior to all other farm animals in general intelligence'.

odd how little one remembers what is actually said. I am thinking of the new paper.
Saturday 1 March
And then I went for a walk 6k brought on a headache, & so lay down
again till today, Saturday—a fine day—when we   _   „            , „    ,
i.i»      1T11/-JL         j10 Hampstead Garden
propose to drive off—oh Thank God a thousand   suburb [on ~ February]
times—to Rodmell & there be at rest. This
little affair has taken 3 weeks, & will land me in 4, of non-writing inex-
pressiveness. Yet I'm not sure that this is not the very thing for The
Waves. It was dragging too much out of my head— If ever a book
drained me, this one does. If I had wisdom, no doubt I should potter at
Rodmell for a fortnight, not writing. I shall take a look at it one of these
mornings in my sunny room.
One evening here I had the odd experience of perfect rest & satisfaction.
All the bayonets that prod me sank. There I lay (I daresay for an hour)
happy. And the quality was odd. Not an anxiety, not a stir, anywhere.
No one coming. Nothing to do. All strain ceased. A    .      ....   ...,
supreme sailing with . . . through the dominion (I am
quoting—I think Shelley—& it makes nonsense.) This is the rarest of
all my moods. I cant recall another. Perhaps at Rodmell sometimes.
Everything is shut off. It depends upon having been in the stir of London
for some time. Not to have to get up 6k see Sibyl or Ethel or anybody—
what a supreme relief! And now I have a chance to brew a little quiet
thought. Yesterday I was offered £2,000 to write a life of Boswell by
Doran Heinemann. L. is writing my polite refusal this moment.11 have
bought my freedom. A queer thought that I have actually paid for the
power to go to Rodmell 6k only think of The Waves by refusing this
offer. If I accepted I would buy houses, tables 6k go to Italy; not worth
it. Yesterday we went over 57 Russell Sqre wh. we may take. But I
rather dread the noise 6k the size—I dont know. A lovely view.
Monday 3 March
Rodmell again. My new bedroom again. Children playing in the school. A thick pearl grey blue day; water drops on the window. Suppose health were shown on a thermometer I have gone up io degrees since yesterday,

when I lay, mumbling the bones of Dodo: if it had bones;2 now I sit up, but cannot face going down & bringing an MS to read. Curiosity begins to stir all the same. Such is the effect of 24 hours here, & one ramble for 30 minutes on the flats. The sun wells up, like a pulse, behind the clouds. Tremendous shoals of birds are flying,—& the flop eared trains meeting as usual under Caburn.3
Molly Hamilton writes a d—d bad novel.4 She has the wits to construct a method of telling a story; & then heaps it with the dreariest, most confused litter of old clothes. When I stop to read a page attentively I am shocked by the dishabille of her English. It is like hearing cooks & scullions chattering; she scarcely articulates, dashes it off, I imagine, on blocks of paper, on her knee, at the House of Commons perhaps; or in the Tube. And the quality ofthe emotion is so thick & squab, the emotions of secondrate women painters, of spotted & pimpled young men: I dont know how she conveys such a sense of the secondrate without gift: the soft pedal too, 6k the highminded pedal; & no wit; 6k not precision; 6k no word standing alone, but each flopping on to the shoulder of another— Lord what a style! What a mind. It has energy 6k some ability—chiefly shown in the method; but that breaks down; 6k that too is laboriously lifted. Now being still flabby in the march of the mind, I must read Sea Air—a good manuscript.5
Tuesday 11 March
all because I have to buy myself a dress this afternoon, 6k cant think what I want, I cannot read. I have written, fairly well—but it is a difficult book—at Waves; but cant keep on after 12; 6k now shall write here, for 20 minutes.
My impressions of Margaret [Llewelyn Davies] 6k Lilian [Harris] at Monks House were of great lumps of grey coat; straggling wisps of hair; hats floppy 6k home made; thick woollen stockings; black shoes, many

wraps, shabby handbags, 6k shapelessness, 6k shabbiness 6k dreariness 6k drabness unspeakable. A tragedy in its way. Margaret at any rate deserved better of life than this dishevelled 6k undistinguished end. They are in lodgings—as usual. Have, as usual, a wonderful Xtian Scientist landlady; are somehow rejected by active life; sit knitting perhaps 6k smoking cigarettes, in the parlour where they have their meals, where there is always left a dish of oranges 6k bananas. I doubt if they have enough to eat. They seemed to me flabby 6k bloodless, spread into rather toneless chunks of flesh; having lost any commerce with looking glasses. So we showed them the garden, gave them tea (6k I dont think an iced cake had come Lilian's way this 6 weeks) 6k then—oh the dismal sense of people stranded, wanting to be energised; drifting—all woollen 6k hairy. (It is odd how the visual impression dominates.) There is a jay blue spark in Margaret's eye, now 6k then, But she had not been out of the lodging for 5 weeks because of the East wind. Her mind has softened 6k wrinkled, sitting indoors with the oranges 6k cigarettes. Lilian is almost stone deaf, 6k mumbles 6k crumbles, emerging clearly only once, to discuss politics. Something has blunted Margaret's edge, rusted it, worn it, long before its time. Must old age be so shapeless? The only escape is to work the mind. I shall write a history of English literature, I think, in those days. And I shall walk. And I shall buy clothes, 6k keep my hair tidy, 6k make myself dine out. But perhaps life becomes repetitious, 6k one takes no trouble; is glad to be shovelled about in motor cars. M. has her tragic past. She is pathetic to me now—conciliatory 6k nervous where she used to be trenchant 6k severe. Janet she says writes endless notes; has sisters for ever staying with her to convalesce; 6k Emphie caught up their little white dog the other day from a wild herd of racing greyhounds, 6k had it bitten to death in her arms.6 This is the sort of adventure that only befalls elderly unmarried women, on whom it makes a tremendous 6k very painful impression—so defenceless are they, so unable to throw off the damp blanket that surrounds them. What I miss is colour, energy, any clear reflection of the moment. I see those thick stockings 6k grey hairy wraps everywhere.
Monday 17 March
The test of a book (to a writer) [is] if it makes a space in which, quite naturally, you can say what you want to say. As this morning I could say

what Rhoda said. This proves that the book itself is alive: because it has not crushed the thing I wanted to say, but allowed me to slip it in, without any compression or alteration.
Friday 28 March
Yes, but this book is a very queer business. I had a day of intoxication when I said Children are nothing to this: when I sat surveying the whole book complete, & quarrelled with L. (about Ethel Smyth) & walked it off, felt the pressure of the form—the splendour & the greatness—as— perhaps, I have never felt them. But I shan't race it off in intoxication. I keep pegging away; & find it the most complex, & difficult of all my books. How to end, save by a tremendous discussion, in which every life
shall have its voice—a mosaic—a------. I do not know. The difficulty is
that it is all at high pressure. I have not yet mastered the speaking voice. Yet I think something is there; & I propose to go on pegging it down, arduously, 6k then re-write, reading much of it aloud, like poetry. It will bear expansion. It is compressed I think. It is—whatever I make of it—a large & potential theme—wh. Orlando was not perhaps. At any rate, I have taken my fence.
Home from tea with Nessa & Angelica. A fine spring day. I walked along Oxford St. The buses are strung on a chain. People fight & struggle. Knocking each other off the pavement. Old bareheaded men; a motor car accident; &c. To walk alone in London is the greatest rest.
Tuesday 1 April
And we have got to go & dine with Raymond now, this very potent, astonishingly exciting warm evening. I sit with my window open & hear the humming see a yellow window open in the hotel: I walked back from Leicester Square. What queer memories have got themselves mixed into this evening I asked. Something from a very soft, rather mystic evening; not feverish & fretful; no; by the sea; blue; gentle. And I dropped in at the dressmaker. She has no teeth. She was stitching. She said like a friend Mrs Woolf we are going to move. And I thought you wdnt mind if I left out the stitching as my eyes ached. All that is said tonight is gentle 6k happy 6k seems to thrust into some soft tide. I cant get it right, naturally.
Nessa is at Charleston. They will have the windows open; perhaps even sit by the pond. She will think This is what I have made by years of unknown work—my sons, my daughter. She will be perfectly content (as I suppose) Quentin fetching bottles; Clive immensely good tempered.

They will think of London with dislike. Yet it is very exciting; I shall sip my wine at Raymond's, 6k try 6k elicit something from Lytton. And so must change.
Friday 4 April
I am trying to sketch my last chapter—unsuccessfully; so will use io minutes to note my observations at Raymond's. Chiefly upon the atmosphere of buggery. Lytton's face lit up with love 6k rapture when I deserted the delightful women, with all their gifts, for Mr Williamson, brilliant 6k beautiful, but unknown, of Oxford. Raymond sat on the arm of Lytton's chair. Morgan came in from Meleager. And I went to see Ronnie behind the scenes. He was looking very nice in shorts. Eddy came in from Cochran's latest.1 He had had to stand 6k was (I am making up The Waves) peevish, (humour is what it lacks). Anyhow, he said, Ensor (I forget) looked very pretty in a white suit—the rest oh so hideous. At this the other buggers pricked their ears 6k became somehow silly. I mean rather giggly 6k coy. An atmosphere entirely secluded, intimate, 6k set on one object; all agreed upon the things they liked. Raymond barked once or twice rudely (he is underbred, in voice anyhow) his feeling that I was noting, scoffing. Told me how Gerbault loathed women; then protested that I was not to believe all the stories of D'Annunzio 6k Duse: there was another side; she had maltreated him.2 A protest; raucous, 6k obtrusive. A photograph of Stephen Tennant (Siegfried Sassoon goes to the same dressmaker) in a tunic, in an attitude was shown about; also little boys at a private school. Morgan became unfamiliar, discussing the beauties of Hilton Young's stepson.3 "His skating is magnificent" (then in an undertone deploring some woman's behaviour). This all made on me a tinkling, private, giggling, impression. As if I had gone in to a men's urinal.

Wednesday 9 April
What I now think (about the Waves) is that I can give in a very few strokes the essentials of a person's character. It should be done boldly, almost as caricature. I have yesterday entered what may be the last lap. Like every piece of the book it goes by fits 6k starts. I never get away with it; but am tugged back. I hope this makes for solidity; & must look to my sentences. The abandonment of Orlando & Lighthouse is much checked by the extreme difficulty ofthe form—as it was in Jacob's Room. I think this is the furthest development so far; but of course it may miss fire somewhere. I think I have kept stoically to the original conception. What I fear is that the re-writing will have to be so drastic that I may entirely muddle it somehow. It is bound to be very imperfect. But I think it possible that I have got my statues against the sky.
Friday 11 April
Yesterday walked through the Waddesdon Greenhouses with Mr Johnson.4 There were single red lines taking root in sand. Cyclamen by the hundred gross. Azaleas massed like military bands. Carnations at different stages. Vines being picked thin by sedulous men. Nothing older than 40 years, but now ready made in perfection. A fig tree that had a thousand lean regular branches. The statues tied up, like dead horses, in sheets. The whole thing dead. Made, planted, put into position in the year 1880 or thereabouts. One flower wd. have given more pleasure than those dozens of grosses. And the heat, & the tidiness & the accuracy & the organisation. Mr Johnson like a nectarine, hard, red, ripe. He was taught all he knew by Miss Alice, & accepted admiration as his income. Sir he called us.
Sunday 13 April
I read Shakespeare directly I have finished writing, when my mind is agape & red & hot. Then it is astonishing. I never yet knew how amazing his stretch & speed & word coining power is, until I felt it utterly outpace & outrace my own, seeming to start equal & then I see him draw ahead & do things I could not in my wildest tumult & utmost press of mind

imagine. Even the less known & worser plays are written at a speed that is quicker than anybody else's quickest; & the words drop so fast one can't pick them up. Look at this, Upon a gather'd lily almost wither'd (that is a pure accident: I happen to light on it.)5 Evidently the pliancy of his mind was so complete that he could furbish out any train of thought; &, relaxing lets fall a shower of such unregarded flowers. Why then should anyone else attempt to write. This is not 'writing' at all. Indeed, I could say that Shre surpasses literature altogether, if I knew what I meant. I meant to make this note of Waddesdon greenhouses. There were rows of hydrangeas, mostly a deep blue. Yes, said Mr Johnson, Lord Kitchener came here & asked how we blued them . . .6 I said you put things in the earth. He said he did too. But sometimes with all one's care, they shot a bit pink. Miss Alice wouldn't have that. If there was a trace of pink there, it wouldnt do. And he showed us a metallic petalled hydrangea. No that wouldnt do for Miss Alice. It struck me, what madness, & how easy to pin ones mind down to the blueness of hydrangeas, 6k to hypnotise Mr Johnson into thinking only of the blueness of hydrangeas. He used to go to her every evening, for she scarcely saw anyone, 6k they would talk for two hours about the plants 6k politics. How easy to go mad over the blueness of hydrangeas 6k think of nothing else.
The Woolfs drove to Rodmell on 16 April for Easter and did not return to London until 27th.
Wednesday 23 April
This is a very important morning in the history of The Waves, because I think I have turned the corner 6k see the last lap straight ahead. I think I have got Bernard into the final stride. He will go straight on now, 6k then stand at the door; 6k then there will be a last picture of the waves. We are at Rodmell, 6k I daresay I shall stay on a day or two (if I dare) so as not to break the current 6k finish it. O Lord 6k then a rest; 6k then an article; 6k then back again to this hideous shaping 6k moulding. There may be some joys in it all the same.
J. .                        'When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
Stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey-dew Upon a gather'd lily almost wither'd."
Titus Andronicus, III, i. 6. Horatio  Herbert  Kitchener,   1st  Earl  of Khartoum  and  Broome  (1850-1916), Field-Marshal and popular military hero.

Saturday 26 April
Having had no letters for 3 days I feel my balloon shrink. All that semi-transparent globe wh. my fame attaches to me is pricked; & I am a mere stick. This is very wholesome; & grey; & not altogether displeasing though flat.
Sunday 27 April
A queer adventure, to come back & find Lottie in the house (her great box under the kitchen table) having been dismissed by Karin for stealing. She was sent with a policeman to the station. She is to sleep here tonight. And I am to see Karin.
Tuesday 29 April
And I have just finished, with this very nib-full of ink, the last sentence of The Waves. I think I should record this for my own information. Yes, it was the greatest stretch of mind I ever knew; certainly the last pages; I dont think they flop as much as usual. And I think I have kept starkly & ascetically to the plan. So much I will say in self-congratulation. But I have never written a book so full of holes & patches; that will need re-building, yes, not only re-modelling. I suspect the structure is wrong. Never mind. I might have done something easy & fluent; & this is a reach after that vision I had, the unhappy summer—or three weeks—at Rodmell, after finishing The Lighthouse. (And that reminds me—I must hastily provide my mind with something else, or it will again become pecking & wretched, —something imaginative, if possible, & light; for I shall tire of Hazlitt & criticism after the first divine relief—. & I feel pleasantly aware of various adumbrations in the back of my head; a life of Duncan: no, something about canvases glowing in a studio: but that can wait.)
I must run upstairs & peep in & tell Leonard & ask about Lottie, who has been after a place; & by the way injured yesterdays lap I am afraid with her vicissitudes.
Pm. And, I think to myself as I walk down Southampton Row "And I have given you a new book."
Thursday 1 May
And I have completely ruined my morning. Yes that is literally true. They sent a book from The Times, as if advised by Heaven of my liberty; & feeling my liberty wild upon me, I rushed to the cable & told Van

Doren I would write on Scott. And now having read Scott, or the perky & impertinent editor whom Hugh provides to dish up tasty fragments, I wont & cant:1 & have got into a fret trying to read it, & writing to Richmond to say I cant; & have wasted the brilliant first of May which makes my skylight blue & gold; have only a rubbish heap in my head; cant read, & cant write, & cant think. The truth is, of course, I want to be back at The Waves. Yes that is the truth. Unlike all my other books in every way, it is unlike them in this, that I begin to re-write it, & conceive it again with ardour, directly I have done. I begin to see what I had in my mind; & want to begin cutting out masses of irrelevance, & clearing, sharpening & making the good phrases shine. One wave after another. No room. & so on. But then we are going touring Devon & Cornwall on Sunday which means a week oft"; & then I shall perhaps make my critical brain do a months work, for exercise. What could it be set to? Or a story?—no, not another story now. Perhaps Miss Burney's half sister's story,2
On Sunday 4 May the Woolfs set out on a week's tour by car of South-Western England, travelling Hogarth Press books in Bath, Bristol, Exeter, Truro and Penzance, and staying in hotels; they lunched at St Ives on j May, and then turned homewards, driving via Exeter, Shaftesbury, Salisbury and Winchester to Lewes, spending two nights at Monks House before returning to London on 11 May.
Sunday 18 May
The thing is now to live with energy & mastery, desperately. To despatch each day high handedly. To make much shorter work ofthe day than one used. To feel each like a wave slapping up against one. So not to dawdle & dwindle, contemplating this & that. To do what ever comes along with decision; going to the Hawthornden prize giving rapidly & lightheartedly; to buy a coat; to Long Barn; to Angelica's School;

thrusting through the mornings work (Hazlitt now) then adventuring.3 And when one has cleared a way, then to go directly to a shop & buy a desk, a book case. No more regrets & indecisions. That is the right way to deal with life now that I am 48: & to make it more & more important & vivid as one grows old.
This is all very well; but what if Nelly then gets taken ill with her kidneys, must have an operation. Soberly & seriously a whole fortnight has been blown from my life; because I have had to hang about to see Elly, to buy food, to arrange with Taupin, to arrange with the hospital; to go there in an ambulance. My mind in order to work needs to be stretched tight & flat. It has been broken into shivers. With great plodding I have managed to write about the Women's Guild. And I consider setting to work on The Waves. I have had over 6 weeks holiday from it. Only again, this morning is ruined because I sit waiting a char, who does not come. And we have Lyn 6k Sir R. Storrs to tea.4
VW stayed the night of 23 May at Long Barn, after being taken by V. Sackville-West to see her prospective home, the ruined Sissinghurst Castle; the following day LW drove her, Vanessa and Duncan to visit Angelica at her school near Colchester. Nelly Boxall went into hospital on 28 May, and was operated on 3 June. On 29 May the Hogarth Press installed a new printing machine; the old one was given to Vita Sackville-West, and is still at Sissinghurst Castle. From 5-to June the Woolfs were at Rodmell for Whitsun; on 11 th they went to see Paul Robeson, Sibyl Thorndike and Peggy Ashcroft in Othello at the Savoy Theatre.
Sunday 15 June
How many skips there are here! Nothing said of our tour through the West; nothing said of N.'s operation; of Taupin, who lost my key broke

tumblers & cooked with the faded inspiration of one who had been a good cook; & nothing said of the divine relief of my quiet evenings, without servants; & how we dine out at the Cock; & how we say, can't this last? & then how I rang up Mrs Walters; & that experiment, an arduous one, begins tomorrow.1 Leonard is not apt at a crisis. I mean his caution sticks his back up. He foresees obstacles. He has a philanthropic side too, which I distrust. Must be good to dependants. I am too hurried to spread these notes wider. At anyrate, Mrs W. an American who wishes to work, has been a journalist, is an intellectual, comes into our service tomorrow; being, as it were, Miss Ritchie, or Lyn Eirven. I have to give her orders; & she has to empty the slops. Will it work? will it last? Anyhow—every sentence begins anyhow—an interesting experience.
Monday 16 June
Mrs Walters is now here. And she says "What do you want with a Char?" But then new brooms &c. She is not new in one sense; rather old & lined; no, younger than I am; but a hard face, I think; but I forbear to crack her kernel. The interest will be to get a new light on housekeeping. My books are now my idol. Can I manage on less? How many pints? How many pounds of butter? Oh to be rid of servants—for all the emotions they breed—trust, suspicion, benevolence, gratitude, philanthropy, are necessarily bad.
And Nellie is now deposited on us for a day; turned out of hospital at a moments notice. I am amused to witness the conflict between L. & me. I hold a brief (hiddenly) for Walters; he (hiddenly) for Nelly. If the books are high, he secretly rejoices. If the food is good, I secretly denigrate Nelly's cooking. It is odd how those old scenes rankle in my mind—how unwilling I am to have her back. Partly the silence is so grateful; & partly the absence of lower classes. I think with real shrinking of having her in control again. Yet she is obliging friendly affectionate; & I cannot bring myself to talk to her as I should. I am always seeing myself told to "leave my room".
But enough—a useful phrase.
I dont know why, but I have stinted this book. The summer is in full swing. Its elements this year are Nessa & Duncan, Ethel Smyth, Vita & re-writing The Waves. We are very prosperous. On making up half yearly accounts, we find that we each get £425: & next year is sure, owing
1. Mrs Karl Walter, ne'e Margaret Hardy, acted as cook-housekeeper to the Woolfs for six weeks—until they went to Rodmell for the summer.

to the gigantic sale of The Edwardians—it verges on the 20,000. And it is not a very good book. Ethel Smyth drops in; dropped in yesterday for instance, when I was so methodically devoting my morning to finishing the last page of type setting: On Being 111;21 heard a ring, went up, & saw an old char in her white alpaca coat; sat her down; disburdened her of cardboard boxes; full of white pinks; & looked at her rather monumental old colonel's face (girt round with an inappropriate necklace, for she was going to lunch with Beecham.3) I get, generally, two letters daily. I daresay the old fires of Sapphism are blazing for the last time. In her heyday she must have been formidable—ruthless, tenacious, exacting, lightning quick, confident; with something of the directness & [single-?] ness of genius, though they say she writes music like an old dryasdust German music master. Her style in writing memoirs though is to her credit—indeed she has ridden post haste through life; & accumulated an astonishing number of observations, with which she qualifies her conversation so as to drive L. almost frantic. One speech of hers lasted 20 minutes unbroken, he says, the other night. We were starting for a picnic at Ken Wood with Nessa & Duncan. Their sublime ineptitude made me laugh & made Ethel laugh & made Eddy peevish. There we sat in the garage, heaving, rotating, stinking. Then we stuck in Gower Street. The night drew on & the wind rose. A spot of rain descended. We heaved our way up to Hampstead. The house was cadaverous; the rhododendrons blanched. Where should we dine? Better go back to Fitzroy St—which we did, & dined off sandwiches & strawberries about io o'clock in the highest glee. She is a game old bird—an old age entirely superior in vitality to Margaret's.
[Sunday 6 July]
And to tell the truth in the 15 minutes that remain before I go up to Mrs Walter's cold 6k exquisite but rather expensive lunch—to tell the truth I am slightly annoyed, both with Margaret 6k with Mr Birrell. Those were two kind acts of mine: the Women's Guild article & the article on

B.1 Neither has thanked me. M. sent a postcard. Yet I spent two or even 3 weeks on that Letter; & worked & worked. Never—this is the moral— do a kindness in writing. Never agree to use one's art as an act of friendship. And therefore refuse to write about Maurice Baring, as he wishes. We came into Ethel's drawing room last Thursday & found a row standing against the window—the D[uche]ss of Sermoneta, M. Baring, & Joyce Wethered.2 Can I tell the story? I said to Maurice as we plodded after Joyce—Ethel running helter skelter after her great fuzzy dog—I said "This is like a party in literature—like Jane Austen's box hill party." There was a space 6k a formality 8c a definiteness about it that made it a real entertainment—with longueurs, with crises, with lapses, with culminations. We all had to wash. We all had to do this, to do that. Ethel's home is better than I expected. She has more beauty 8c even comfort about than I expected from her alpaca coat. The red 6k pink roses were thick on the walls. The flowers were lush in the beds. All was glowing 8c bright. She has white rough cast walls; 6k no furniture that has cost more than a pound or two—much is old schoolroom furniture endeared to her by her intense egotistic imagination. "It was there I sat, when Mary played the piano . . . And I said Mary couldn't you play G. sharp instead of G. natural . . . Thats the bed—Virginia you will have this room when you come to stay—where Sargent used to sleep, lying across: (because it is an old iron bed). And thats my father 6k mother— she was the artist. . ."3

But I got the impression of a very genuine, breeze blown mind; a free, entirely energised character—no impediments no inhibitions—the freest talk with Maurice. "I met a nephew of yours Ethel, with two names". "Well you might have—with two names". No, I cant give the sense of her largeness, & space & ease & good breeding & character. She is, oddly, much more expert as a hostess than as a guest; doesn't talk too much; is penetrating & quick, & has this delicious ease in summoning, conjuring up, people, like Lady Balfour & Mrs Lyttelton from the neighbourhood.4 They sat on the sofa while I, sipping champagne, talked fast & furious to Maurice B. who turned lobster colour & trembled, & chattered about his books. There were 5 people who used to help me: all are now dead. He has had his sorrows: I dont know what: loved ladies, I daresay.
[Monday 21 July]
And I went down again to Woking on Tuesday (this is written waiting for Vita, on a very wet cold afternoon. She is going to drive us round to look at a wardrobe. I am going to buy a gilt wardrobe I think. Well, it is very wet, & I am rather discomposed, with making 2 articles into one & so on.5 And I am not dining (here)
Wednesday 23 July
Edith Sitwell has grown very fat, powders herself thickly, gilds her nails with silver paint, wears a turban & looks like an ivory elephant, like the Emperor Heliogabalus.6 I have never seen such a change. She is mature, majestical. She is monumental. Her fingers are crusted with white coral. She is altogether composed. A great many people were there—& she presided. But though thus composed, her eyes are sidelong & humorous. The old Empress remembers her Scallywag days. We all sat at her feet—cased in slender black slippers, the only remnants of her slipperiness & slenderness. Who was she like? Pope in a nightcap? No; the imperial majesty must be included. We hardly talked together, & I

felt myself gone there rather mistakenly, had she not asked me very affectionately if she might come & see me alone. Her room was crowded with odds & ends of foreigners: the uncrowned King of Barcelona; Gerald's partner; Osbert; Lady Lavery &c.7 Lady L. discussed the air crash. She said le Bon Dieu had taken them all at the right time. They had all done with life. Once too she would have been glad to die . . . This refers to the deaths of Lord Dufferin Lady Ednam &c.8 I was driving down to the Temple with Vita, & we bought a Standard in the gateway. 'Titled victims' she said. Well it cant be Harold I said. Then I read out Lady Ednam, Marquis Dusserre (for so they reported him) & then in the stop press Lord Dufferin— What Lady Ednam? Dufferin? she cried. There was Harold on the pavement before their house.9 "Yes, he said, Its Lady Ednam" "But its Freddy too" cried Vita (no she spoke composedly). God said Harold & read the stop press. Now what are we to do? I cant broadcast said Vita. I must tell my mother said Harold. First I'll get the paper though. Good Lord—Yes its Dufferin & Lady Ednam. "Is that Lady Carnock. Darling I have some bad news for you. Have you seen the paper? Freddy's been in a smash. He's killed, they think. Could you tell Aunt Lai?" What did your mother say Harold? Just 'Oh'. Now we cant dine with Lady Cunard. Oh yes dear we must. Perhaps I shall have to go down & see them— It was, as one says, like a scene in a play. The newspaper: the telephoning. The extreme simplicity & composure of it all: Boski typing; the man cleaning shoes; Harold telephoning, like a man in a play. So they drove off that wet grey evening to Lady Cunard's: dinner at 9. 30 people; & I did not go. (& I hear the whole party waited for me for half an hour)10

Saturday 26 July
Just back from a night at Long Barn, where I retrieved that fact about Emerald's party, waiting half an hour, all in the sulks too for the smash of their best friends. And Lady E. & Mrs S. strewed Kent with £62,000 worth of jewels.11 Jewels in their hats, round their necks: somehow this makes me less sorry for them; undemocratic though I am. I rather like thinking of pearls pendant from oak trees.
I have 15—no 12—minutes before lunch; & am all of a quiver with home coming to L., to 2 newts in the bathroom, Letters (from Ethel, & flowers) books &c. A very nice homecoming; & I daresay a sample of my life, picked out of the mass (as it is, when one comes back) makes me a little amazed at my own happiness. I daresay few women are happier— not that I am consistently anything; but feel that I have had a good draught of human life, & find much champagne in it. It has not been dull—my marriage; not at all.
I liked rambling over Vita's new fields,12 & talking to Mrs Page about the haycrop; & then champagne for dinner—an extravagance of Harold's; sleep in the sitting room; a log fire; dogs; aeroplanes at night; dogs again; & breakfast in bed—mushroom & peach & hot bath, & so home, as I say, to the newts & Leonard. Clive will come to tea. Perhaps we may go to the play.13 And perhaps I might decide to have a new educated woman as servant. This comes on top of a day of Nelly Lottie & Mrs Mansfield. Their jokes their presence their familiarity, wh. rouse the usual reflections.
Passing the public House this Sunday afternoon, the buzz of voices through the door was exactly the same as at an evening party. My first thought was censorious: people in public houses. But this was soon corrected. I dont see much difference between the Marchmont Arms & Argyle [Argyll] House; or 3 Albert Road if it comes to that; except that we drink champagne & wear satin, & I sit between Lord Gage & Bernstorf.14

Monday 28 July
A queer inconclusive but possibly fruitful conversation with Mrs Walter this morning. I think she would like to stay, if we could offer more wages. The truth is her husband has mistresses; or flirts. And she wishes to devote herself to us entirely—to do everything—that I should never have to order coffee. But she is going to think it out in August in Italy with Karl. I rather suspect (in my private mind) that we shall make a break here with Nelly, & take her—a great risk; rather fun: I feel io years younger instantly at the thought ofa change. Anyhow, my constant relief at the absence of Nelly seems to prove that the system is as wrong as I've always said. Rooms empty of servants; to sit quietly; to have no jag [?], no unreal condescending talk. Other drawbacks suggest themselves —still anything for experiment—anything.
The Woolfs went to Rodmell for their summer break on 21 July.
Wednesday 6 August
This is written at Rodmell; oh yes, & it is the best, the freest, the comfortablest summer we have ever had. Figure to yourself feet swollen in boots. One takes them off—that is my state without poor dear Nelly; with nice bright Annie. The rain pelts—look at it (as the people in The Waves are always saying) now. My dinner is cooking. I have so many rooms to sit in, I scarcely know which to choose. And new chairs. And comfort everywhere, 6k some beginnings of beauty. But it is the freedom from servants that is the groundwork & bedrock of all this expansion. After lunch we are alone till Breakfast. I say, as I walk the downs, never again never again. Cost what it may, I will never put my head into that noose again.
I walk; I read; I write, without terrors & constrictions. I make bread. I cook mushrooms. I wander in & out of the kitchen. I have a resource besides reading. Why we ever suffered that discomfort so long, that presence always grumbling, always anyhow (for thats unfair) at a different angle from ours, needing gramo [text ends]
Wednesday 20 August
Last night was Quentin's birthday. "Another Quentin birthday over" said Maynard, at the gate after the fireworks, counting perhaps the remaining years. The rockets went roaring up & scattered their gold grain. That is an old phrase; but I always think of grain when I see them.

I can never find another. The willows were lit grey over the pond. The bonfire was forked, like branches in a wind. Nessa, in red, threw on a screen. Angelica, whirring & twirling like an old screaming witch, danced round it. "Childhood—true childhood" said Lydia. For some minutes everything that was said had the quality of sayings in a Tchekhov play.
I am writing while my potatoes boil. It has been a hot heavy ugly crusty[?] day; still, sulphurous; & the dogs have barked all round the village, one starting another. And the men have hammered on the spire. And I have been driven out & in. I have slept here, over an article by Vernon Lee, sent me in Ethel's daily letter. Ethel's letters are daily: for we have so much to make up. Time is short. "I would like to see Italy before I die" she says in todays letter. Should I curtail her & curb them? I think not. If one adventures, adventure wholly. And she is so courageous, remarkable shrewd, that it would be mere poltroonery for me to hold off for fear of ridicule (still they hammer, at 6.45.) So I let that old bonfire rage red & perhaps throw a screen on it. It is a very happy free, & indeed to me occasionally sublime summer. Yes, I think I have decided against Nelly: but dont let me rub that sore. I think I am on the back of The Waves now. Then my walks. How lovely it was exploring yesterday to the Hump! How strange that in almost 20 years I have never been that way—out along the marsh road beyond Sutton house. I see a line I might make to Lewes. I fell in & twisted my ankle. I saw an astonishing assortment of cones & angles of grey 6k gold down, back against back. I was very happy. I like the still, the profound slow happiness best. One day I walked to Firle, in a shower & found a 4 bladed pocket knife.
The Waves is I think resolving itself (I am at page 100) into a series of dramatic soliloquies. The thing is to keep them running homogeneously in & out, in the rhythm of the waves. Can they be read consecutively? I know nothing about that. I think this is the greatest opportunity I have yet been able to give myself: therefore I suppose the most complete failure. Yet I respect myself for writing this book. Yes—even though it exhibits my congenital faults.
Janet Vaughan is engaged, & Gerald Brenan married.1
Barbara [Bagenal] last night was aged, out of her element, peevish, & very red & beaky.
Julian silent. Clive undoubtedly on a fresh tack which does not allow of intimacy with me. I make these notes waiting in vain for that very

interesting remark to occur wh. was on the tip of my tongue; 6k will not now emerge, though I bait & wait. If one writes little notes, suddenly one thinks of something profound. I am reading Dante, & I say, yes, this makes all writing unnecessary. This surpasses 'writing' as I say about Shre. I read the Inferno for half an hour at the end of my own page: 6V that is the place of honour; that is to put the page into the furnace—if I have a furnace. Now to mash the potatoes. & L. has laid my carpet.
Monday 25 August
Ethel came for a night on Friday, & in order to drown Percy's mowing I will write here; for the friction of writing is a protection; 6k the dogs 6k the spire have been bad today. But they are bad because I am re-writing Hazlitt; having stopped The Waves at the break; 6k I am happy; 6k it is a very hot day; 6k we have been into Lewes, 6k I walked home part of the way. This is the only really hot day we have had. But I wish if I can to describe Ethel. At least let me pelt in a few notes of this curious unnatural friendship. I say unnatural because she is so old, 6k everything is incongruous. Her head is an enormous size over the temples. Music is there, she said, tapping her temples. That way lies insanity. What Walter said; what Wach (or someone) said—she cannot refrain from repeating what I guess to be very worn compliments, often repeated to herself at dead of night.2 For she cannot get over unfortunately her own ill-treatment. A refrain occurs; 6k it is all the more marked for being in contrast with the generosity, sense, balance, 6k shrewdness of all else. Off her own music, 6k the conspiracy against her—for the Press are determined to burke her, though she fills every hall—thats the line of it—she is an admirable guest. Oh yes 6k more. I went through some odd vicissitudes, in the way of emotion. Lying in my chair in the firelight she looked 18; she looked a young vigorous handsome woman. Suddenly this vanishes; then there is the old crag that has been beaten on by the waves: the humane battered face that makes one respect human nature: or rather feel that it is indomitable 6k persistent. Then, she is worldly; by which I mean something I like; unembarrassed, aired, sunned, acquainted with this way of life 6k that; lived in many societies; taken her own way in shirt 6k tie vigorously unimpeded; then I am conscious, I suppose, of the compliment she pays me. But then she is over 70. And (oh the dogs—oh Percy!—6k I had

marked off such a lovely evening—what am I to do?) She is sometimes startlingly quick. She has a lightning speed of perception which I liken to my own. But she is more robust; better grounded on fact than I am. She takes in a situation in one word. I told her about Margaret & my difficulties with the paper. No woman of 30 could have seen so swiftly or put the matter more succinctly in a nutshell, (her fault as a talker is diffusity). I had some interesting moments. About jealousy for instance. "D'you know Virginia, I dont like other women being fond of you." "Then you must be in love with me Ethel". "I have never loved anyone so much" (Is there something senile in this? I dont know). "Ever since I saw you I have thought of nothing else &c. I had not meant to tell you." But I want affection. "You may take advantage of this". No. Well, this, so far as I can boil it down, is Ethel's state. But what I like in her is not I think her love for how difficult it is to make that intelligible—it is compact of so many things—she exaggerates—I am sensitive to exaggeration—what I like is the indomitable old crag; & a certain smile, very wide & benignant. But dear me I am not in love with Ethel. And oh yes—her experience.
Thursday 28 August
It is the hottest day ofthe year: & so it was last year, almost on this day; & I was at Long Barn, & there was the Eton tutor, a nice young man with blue eyes white teeth & straight nose—& he now lies at the bottom of a crevasse in Switzerland—this very hot evening—lies crushed beside his Mary Irving: there are the two bodies for ever. I suppose some ice drips, or shifts: the light is blue, green; or wholly black; nothing stirs round them. Frozen, near together, in their tweeds & hobnail boots there they lie.3 And I am here; writing in my lodge, looking over the harvest fields.
I suppose they felt whirled, like hoops; battered; senseless, after the first horror of feeling out of control.
A very violent summer.
So I said to Janie Bussy Julian & Quentin on the terrace last Sunday.
The church was finished today & the scaffolding taken down. I am reading R. Lehmann, with some interest & admiration4—she has a clear hard mind, beating up now 6k again to poetry; but I am as usual appalled by the machinery of fiction: its much work for little result. Yet I see no other outlet for her gifts. And these books dont matter—they flash a clear

light here & there; but I suppose no more. But she has all the gifts (I suppose) that I lack; can give story & development & character & so on.
Annie offered me a paper weight of Strahn [? Strachan] in Scotland today in return for our paying her oculists bill.
/ Tuesday 2 September
I was walking down the path with Lydia. If this dont stop, I said, referring to the bitter taste in my mouth & the pressure like a wire cage of sound over my head, then I am ill: yes, very likely I am destroyed, diseased, dead. Damn it! Here I fell down—saying "How strange— flowers". In scraps I felt & knew myself carried into the sitting room by Maynard, saw L. look very frightened; said I will go upstairs; the drumming of my heart, the pain, the effort got violent at the doorstep; overcame me; like gas; I was unconscious; then the wall & the picture returned to my eyes; I saw life again. Strange I said, & so lay, gradually recovering till 11 when I crept up to bed. Today, Tuesday, I am in the lodge & Ethel comes—valiant old woman!
But this brush with death was instructive 6k odd. Had I woken in the divine presence it wd. have been with fists clenched 6k fury on my lips. "I dont want to come here at all!" So I should have exclaimed. I wonder if this is the general state of people who die violently. If so figure the condition of Heaven after a battle.
I think one might write a fantasia called Reflections on the sight of a daddy long legs. There was one just now (I have moved in from the lodge, thus disturbing both L. 6k Annie) crawling over the handmade paper on wh. I have to sign my name 600 times.1 This bright sunny patch was his only pleasure. Yes, 6k then one dislikes daddies because they eat one's plants. One has some kindness for their very few pleasures. What is one's relation to insects?
It suddenly comes over me how I used to hook a piece of paper to me out of the nurse's eye in other illnesses—what a tremendous desire to write I had.
I will use these last pages to sum up our circumstances. A map of the world.
Leaving out the subject of Nelly, which bores me, we are now much freer 6k richer than we have ever been. For years I never had a pound

extra; a comfortable bed, or a chair that did not want stuffing. This morning Hammond [Lewes furnishers] delivered 4 perfectly comfortable arm chairs—& we think very little of it.
I seldom see Lytton; that is true. The reason is that we dont fit in, I imagine, to his parties nor he to ours; but that if we can meet in solitude, all goes as usual. Yet what do one's friends mean to one, if one only sees them 8 times a year? Morgan I keep up with in our chronically spasmodic way. We are all very much aware of life, & seldom do anything we do not want to. My Bell family relations are young, fertile & intimate. Julian & Quentin change so much. This year Q. is shabby easy natural & gifted; last year he was foppish, finicky & affected. Julian is publishing with Chatto & Windus.2 As for Nessa & Duncan I am persuaded that nothing can be now destructive of that easy relationship, because it is based on Bohemianism. My bent that way increases—in spite of the prodigious fame (it has faded out since July 15 th: I am going through a phase of obscurity; I am not a writer: I am nothing: but I am quite content) I am more & more attracted by looseness, freedom, & eating one's dinner off a table anywhere, having cooked it previously. This rhythm (I say I am writing The Waves to a rhythm not to a plot3) is in harmony with the painters'. Ease & shabbiness & content therefore are all ensured. Adrian i never see. I keep constant with Maynard. I never see Saxon. I am slightly repelled by his lack of generosity; yet would like to write to him. Perhaps I will. George Duckworth, feeling the grave gape, wishes to lunch with Nessa; wishes to feel again the old sentimental emotions. After all, Nessa & I are his only women relations. A queer cawing of homing rooks this is. I daresay the delights of snobbishness somewhat fail in later life—& we have done—'made good'—that is his expression.
My map of the world lacks rotundity. There is Vita. Yes—She was here the other day, after her Italian tour, with 2 boys; a dusty car, sandshoes & Florentine candlepieces, novels & so on tumbling about on the seats. I use my friends rather as giglamps: Theres another field I see: by your light. Over there's a hill. I widen my landscape.

Monday 8 September
I will signalise my return to life—that is writing—by beginning a new book, & it happens to be Thoby's birthday, I remark. He would have been, I think, 50 today.
After coming out here I had the usual—oh how usual—headache; & lay, like a fibre of tired muscle on my bed in the sitting room, till yesterday. Now up again & on again; with one new picture in my mind; my defiance of death in the garden.
But the sentence with which this book was to open ran "Nobody has ever worked so hard as I do"—exclaimed in driving a paper fastener through the 14 pages of my Hazlitt just now. Time was when I dashed off these things all in the days work. Now, partly because I must do them for America & make arrangements far ahead, I spend I daresay a ridiculous amount of time, more of trouble on them. I began reading Hazlitt in January I think. And I am not sure that I have speared that little eel in the middle—that marrow—which is one's object in criticism. A very difficult business no doubt to find it, in all these essays; so many; so short; & on all subjects. Never mind; it shall go today; & my appetite for criticism is, oddly, whettened. I have some gift that way, were it not for the grind & the screw & the torture—
Vita comes tomorrow; we go to Sissinghurst on Wednesday; I shall attack The Waves on Thursday. So this illness has meant two weeks break—but as I often think, seasons of silence, & brooding, & making up much more than one can use, are fertilising. I was raking my brain too hard.
Anyhow, this is the happiest summer since we had Monks House; the most satisfactory. We hope on Percy's evidence—P. was tidying old Hawkesworth's grave—that the Byng Stamper farm has been bought by a horsebreeder, & all the land is to be under grass—not bungalows. And Annie surprises one daily with her amenity, dexterity & sympathy—the most convincing argument in favour of living out that I know. Yesterday I sent an advertisement to Time & Tide—but hush! Profound secrecy is essential.4 The weather is September weather, bright, sunny, cool. We have a project of making my bedroom the sitting room—for the view. To let it waste, day after day, seems a crime: elderly eyes cannot waste. No, I would like to have another life, & live it in action. So I thought.

looking at Caburn, & imagining the feelings ofa strong young man, who was walking up it, with wife & children, & a career in the City ... I think. No he was a politician; & I think he was also an Indian civil servant. He was not a writer: These are the stories one invents. And this: "At the age of 50 Priestley will be saying "Why don't the highbrows admire me? It isn't true that I only write for money." He will be enormously rich; but there will be that thorn in his shoe—et so I hope. Yet I have not read, & I daresay shall never read, a book by Priestley. And I (to solace myself) get a letter from a Mr Spender saying he cares for my praise more than for that of any critic—& he sends me his poems.5 And I invent this phrase for Bennett & Priestley "the tradesmen of letters".
Wednesday 24 September*
I have taken up my staff again; I wish I could say that my book was my staff; but oh dear, how many people I have seen—dashing that support from my hand! It must have been the afternoon I wrote this—yes, because L. & Percy were in the middle of moving the furniture into the sitting room—that Mary & Barbara [Hutchinson]'s little medicine bottle heads appeared at the window. How I scowled! And then there was Alice Ritchie, then the Wolves, then Morgan, then a party at Charleston then London, & then those curious women, Miss Ibbotson & Mrs Starr.7
"I am a cousin of Florence Nightingale" said Mrs Starr. When I said I was also related, her rather shifty eyes became shiftier. "I cant make

omelettes" said Miss Ibbotson, addressing herself plaintively & at the same time peevishly to Mrs Starr. "It would be a great disaster of course if you sent in your dishes all burnt" said Mrs Starr. "You would give me notice, I suppose" said Miss Ibbotson. Miss Ibbotson was bankrupt; "Beggars can't be choosers" she said, "& so thats why I'm back again at this". Miss Ibbotson had once owned two motor cars & driven them for hire in London, but competition with the men had been too much. She had also been ill. She was skinny, raddled; wore a small corduroy jacket, & a rather dirty white shirt; had a red pocket-handkerchief; thick mended stockings & thick shoes. Mrs Starr was dressed in blue Liberty silk & a straw hat. She reproved Miss I. for being too diffident. "If I could have a trial" Miss I. repeated. But you will soon pick it up" said Mrs S. "I cant do fancy cooking" said Miss I. "And I would like to do some of the cleaning." "I shall do the cleaning" said Mrs S. "& you will do the kitchen." These remarks were shot at each other, & plainly represented much previous argument, though why Mrs S., so compact, if sly, had come into touch with Miss I., so wild, with her staring blue eyes & her wideawake, I could not say. An indefinable aroma of sordidity, instability, shadiness, shiftiness pervaded them. They were sure, I think almost at once, that we had seen through them, & that the place was not for them. "We live on Salads" said Mrs S. "though I am not a vegetarian." Sure enough the brown holland bag which they left behind them contained a number of lettuces wrapped in paper.
Miss Rivett-Carnac is the scion ofa great Indian family who let her live in Wimbledon with her mother on a pound a week.8 She has been through a good deal: social work; hostels; running clubs. She is about 35; a perfect lady, enough to be careless of being one; only anxious for shelter, & wages, 6k a little time to herself. She might do—she might be a superior Walter. She has, oh dear, suffered much. And is perhaps, vengeful, acid, worn, trusty, starved of happiness.
Could anything be done to make us less popular? we ask. For instance if I pied Leonard's hair—would that make his mother, Bella, Tom [Southorn], Harold [Woolf], Dorothy Bussy, Ellie Rendel & Ka Cox refuse to invite themselves to see us?
When I offered Miss Rivett-Carnac £50 yesterday it seemed to me nothing, because I was thinking that I can make that by writing 2,000 words. But 5 years ago, £50 was a substantial sum. How money has

shrunk in my mind! This is one ofthe most curious things in my existence —the shrinkage of money.
A perfect September day, after some very imperfect November days; the swallows skimming the terrace; Percy asking if it will be fine tomorrow; if so, he will mow the lawn. The bees are suspected to have been busy. In that case we shall take honey tonight. L. & P. spent the afternoon— Trim & Uncle Toby—mending the fence;9 I spent it walking the downs. I still have in spite of building a perfect stretch, & by juggling a little, can convert distant houses into haystacks.
I am reading Dante; & my present view of reading is to elongate immensely. I take a week over one canto. No hurry.
Our friends work us very hard. Heres Tom Eliot: when are you back? Here's Miss Bartlett [unidentified], may we come to tea. Heres— & my two months' respite nibbled at by all who choose. I think I will spend August next year in Northumberland.
Monday .29 September
So all those days were completely ruined by the assiduity of our friends. When one has to tidy the table, pick fresh flowers, collect chairs 6k be ready, at 4, or at one, to welcome, & all the rest of it the circumjacent parts of the day are ruined. On the whole L.'s family do the trick most thoroughly. Everything is such an effort; so unreal; what I say is so remote from what I feel; their standards are so different from mine; I strain myself perpetually with trying to provide the right cakes, the right jokes, the right affection & inquiries. Naturally it often goes wrong, as on Friday. Harold, who is to me the most sympathetic of them, told a story of the Woolf temper; how Philip had broken down the servants bedroom door in a rage, because they had put a bottle, unfastened, into Bab's bed, & refused to come & make it. Mrs W. who is the vainest of women (poor old lady—yes, ones feeling of poor old woman churns[?] & muddles all one s feelings of her egotism, her vanity) took this as a slur upon herself; 6k began querulously & peevishly to defend her methods of education, & to pay herself the usual compliments upon her wonderful management of so many fatherless & penniless children. And then of course she requires to have these praises corroborated, 6k will not be satisfied until I have also wondered & exclaimed at her amazing unselfishness & courage & agreed that the Woolf temper is merely a proof of their intelligence. Here of course, I begin to see very plainly how ugly, how nosey, how irreparably middle class they all are. Indeed, my aesthetic sense is the one that protests

most obstinately—how they cheapen the house & garden— How they bring in an atmosphere of Earls Court & hotels, how impossibly out of place, & stuffy 6k towny 6k dressy 6k dowdy they look on the terrace, among apple trees 6k vegetables 6k flowers! But there I am pinned down, as firmly as Prometheus on his rock, to have my day, Friday 26th of September 1930, picked to pieces, 6k made cheap 6k ugly 6k commonplace; for the sting of it is that there is no possible escape—no escape that wont make old Mrs Woolf begin to dab her eyes 6k feel that she is not being welcomed—she who is so "painfully sensitive"—so fond of cakes, so incapable of amusing herself, so entirely without any interest in my feelings or friends; so vampire like 6k vast in her demand for my entire attention 6k sympathy, while she sits over the fire, in her dreary furs 6k ugly bonnet 6k large boots, with her pendulous cheeks 6k red nose 6k cheap earrings, talking about Worthing 6k the charms of Dr Watson 6k the niceness of everybody, 6k how she will come to Worthing every year, 6k will expect to come to tea with us. Lord Lord! how many daughters have been murdered by women like this! What a net of falsity they spread over life. How it rots beneath their sweetness—goes brown 6k soft like a bad pear!
At the same time I cannot make out a case for myself as a maltreated person. No, because I have an interest beyond my own nose. But let me note that old age can only be made tolerable by having a firm anchor outside gossip, cakes, 6k sympathy. Think of imposing even one afternoon of such a burden upon Quentin Julian 6k Angelica! I shall spend my day at the British Museum. (This is one of those visual images, without meaning when written down, that conveys a whole state of mind to me)
Rodmell is full of incident, drama, 6k, sometimes I think, coming home over the flats, of beauty 6k solemnity. Mr Fears the epileptic died on Thursday. He had been locked in his room for weeks; but escaped, made off to Southease, 6k called on the Thomases to present his grievance to the Rector.10 One of his grievances was that Mrs Dedman had stolen part of his garden—6k it is said—6k I can believe it—that this was no figment. There she stands in the street, ominous, glum, predatory, grasping, complaining. Then a doctor taps at the window: someone has been taken ill in the street 6k carried into a cottage. It was the mother of Miss Emery the dog breeder.11 She now lies dying perhaps, 6k her husband must be taken for a motor drive while they are burying Mr Fears to distract him

from the thought of death. It is the most miserable of days, cold & drizzling, the leaves falling; the apples fallen; the flowers sodden; mist hiding Caburn. Yet I have written well, & cannot make out a case for myself as a maltreated person.
The great game of diplomacy is begun with Nelly. I have told Dr McGlashan that we will pay her wages, but not have her back till she is well.12
The Woolfs went to Charleston on 1st October whither, at his suggestion, George Duckworth brought his wife and one son to a family luncheon party. On 4th October the Woolfs returned to Tavistock Square.
Saturday 11 October
The fifty coffins have just trundled by, in lorries, spread rather skimpily with Union Jacks—an unbecoming pall—6k stuck about with red & yellow wreaths. The only impressive sight was the rhythmical bending backward slow march of the Guards: for the rest, the human face is often pock marked & ignoble; poor gunners[?] look bored & twitch their noses; the crowd smells; the sun makes it all too like birthday cakes & crackers; 6k the coffins conceal too much. One bone, one charred hand, wd. have done what no ceremony can do: & the heap of a ceremony on ones little coal of feeling presses uneasily. I refer to the burial this morning of the 48 'heroes' of the R101.1 But why 'heroes'? A shifty & unpleasant man, Lord Thomson by all accounts, goes for a joy ride with other notables, 6k has the misfortune to be burnt at Beauvais. That being so, we have every reason to say Good God how very painful—how very unlucky— but why all the shops in Oxford St & Southampton Row shd. display black dresses only & run up black bars; why the Nation should be requested to think of nothing else; why the people should line the streets 6k parade through Westminster Hall, why every paper should be filled

with nobility 6k lamentation 6k praise, why the Germans should muffle their wireless 6k the French ordain a day of mourning 6k the footballers stop for two minutes' silence—beats me 6k Leonard 6k Miss Strachan.2
Wednesday 15 October
I say to myself "But I cannot write another word". I say "I will cut adrift—I will go to Roger in France—I will sit on pavements 6k drink coffee—I will see the Southern hills; I will dream; I will take my mind out of its iron cage 6k let it swim—this fine October". I say all this; with energy: but shall I do it? Shant I peter out here, till the fountain fills again? Oh dear oh dear—for the lassitude ofthe spirit! Rarely rarely comest thou now, spirit of delight. You hide yourself up there behind the hotel windows 6k the grey clouds. (I am writing this with a steel pen which I dip in the ink, so as to forestall the day when my German pens are extinct). It is dismal to broach October so languidly. I rather think the same thing happened last year. I need solitude. I need space. I need air. I need the empty fields round me; 6k my legs pounding along roads; 6k sleep; 6k animal existence. My brain is too energetic; it works; it throws off an article on Christina Rossetti; 6k girds itself up to deal with this 6k that.
Rivett is installed. And she cooks like a freehanded lady. Light sketchy dishes arrive. This is only our second day, 6k Annie, infinitely happy garrulous 6k anxious to stay—how can I put up with Rodmell now, she says. I shall feel shut up inside something—Annie goes today. A curious little interlude this. Alas, one day last week Nelly appeared—of course on her best behaviour—very much the old 6k trusted servant, with, I think, a dash of suspicion. Why did I not have her back 6k give her help, seeing that she had been with us 15 years?—that I think was in her mind. But we kept it down; 6k she is off to Colchester for 10 days 6k then—oh dear, I say again, oh dear. Nessa 6k Duncan are at Cassis, which brings the delicious vision of France too near me—Oh to walk among vineyards I cry again. And lots of people are on the buzz: dined last night with Raymond, a shabby 6k diminished Raymond, whom I like better than the dashing. Not much wine 6k so on. He has given up parties 6k takes Wyndham Lewis much to heart "A middle aged man-milliner" said Lewis in that pamphlet which is like the gossip 6k spite 6k bickering of a

suburban housemaid who has been given notice & is getting a bit of her
own back.3
V,
Saturday 18 October
But behold, I think the spirit of delight is hovering over me, after 2 days at Rodmell, in spite of Ethel Smyth, in spite of Emmie Fisher.4 Two teasing & tormenting letters from them were, of course, forwarded. But we walked to Lewes over the fields—yes, reached our goal, came out under that tunnel; now I have planned this walk for almost 20 years & never taken it. Home now, & find another letter, shaken & remorseful from Ethel, & Tom's new edition of Johnson,5 & ever so many flowers.
Wednesday 22 October
Just back from headache cheating—there should be a name for these peregrinations—at Hampton Court. My misery at the sere & yellow leaves,6 & the ships coming in & I not there & I not there—drove me to take a day off; indeed to plan 2 days off; but no: it rains now; & I'm for the fire.
My misery is Leonard's. Rivett cant cook. Poor woman! Bowed down with a sense of the failure of her life, creeping broken winged, arid, deprecatory, diffident, she sends in meagre savourless dishes & attempts nervous combinations of tapioca & orange. No, no: go she must. And then I think Annie—for ever. But the misery of these trifles can be devastating. Brown sole, brown sauce, & nothing else. And when I make a joke she laughs, as she laughed once in some tennis court to some subaltern I imagine, vainly. She is inve[r]tebrate; crushed; & what, I ask, is to become of her? And how am I to detach her seaweed clinging from my kitchen? For naturally this was a chance, a new start for her; something

untried. And when I say No you can't cook, she will see her hope go bang like a rabbit in a shooting gallery. And I detest these dislodgments. Nelly again yesterday: apprehensive & suspicious; though I think not shaken seriously in her belief that she will come back to her [sic]. Thank the Lord, it rains, & I can bring myself to heel easily now. Winter has set in; draw the curtains; light the fire; & so to work.
Thursday 23 October
Behold, the rather familiar experiment—a new pen, new ink. "I'm afraid ma'am", said the youth at Partridge & Cooper's, "that the Penkala's are extinct." A voice on the telephone had spoken their doom. I went along Faringdon market this afternoon looking for the man with the barrow. I saw the grey towers of, I suppose, Smithfield. I almost went into St Paul's & saw Dr Donne, now uncovered again;7 but being as I say to myself, pressed for time, I walked on, down the Strand.
Ethel came in yesterday evening; rather battered in an old moleskin coat; in the triangular hat which the hotel proprietor at Bath has made into its shape with a few pins. Well, I begin to make note of her, because, among other things—how many others—she said would I like her to leave me some of her letters—the Maggie Benson & Mrs Benson & Lady Ponsonby letters in her will?8 Would you like me to write something about you? I said. Oh yes; what fun! But I should try some experiments. Oh what fun! How I should enjoy it! But I should get it all wrong. Yes, of course; or tear them up. Do just as you like. H. B.'s letters I'm leaving to Maurice Baring; but he'll do nothing. He'll tear them up.
So I am to some extent Ethel's literary executor, a post I have always vaguely desired; & so I now make a few notes as she talks, for a portrait. One would have to bring out her enormous eagerness. She was telling me how she reads Travel books; & her eyes—her blue, rather prominent eyes, positively glitter. And this is not talk about herself, or her music— simply about how people climb—their adventures. Her cheeks burn too. But she looks now & then aged: she said that she was a very brave woman.

It is a quality I adore. And I have it. One of the bravest things I ever did
_. .    .         .  , .    v    was to teu people my age. My vivacity &c—
I his she copied from    t?               , . ,    T,                                           ryr „
Mrs Pankhurst              Everyone thinks I m 20 or 30 years younger. Well
—(a characteristic word, indicating what really becomes necessary—a break—a new paragraph—a wedge inserted in the flood) Well—when I wanted people to realise how long I'd waited for recognition—& have never really had it—I did that—though I hated it: I told them my age, so that they couldn't go on saying Oh but she came into her own—she was recognised. This referred I think, but it is difficult to insert one's own wedges, to the Jubilee Concert at Berlin, on which occasion Lady Jones behaved so badly.9 She was on her way—is now I suppose in the train or on the ship, this cold grey day—to Belfast, to conduct her Sea Songs10 (one of my best things) 6k then, directly thats done, back she comes, across the Irish channel, & returns to Woking & goes on writing about H.B.: that looming imponderable figure: who has so queer an existence; for if I ask about him Logan, Ottoline &c. say Oh a petit maitre; a drawing room philosopher; to which Logan adds the son of a dentist, 6k Ottoline adds, he made love to me, 6k I found him intolerable. This was the man who dominated Ethel's life, this wraith who wanders about in Logan's 6k Ethel's lives. What a strange job then to write, as I may one day, the life of a woman whose past is thus nebulous. And I have only come in time to hear about the past. Everything is past. She hopes not to live another seven years; gives me to understand that now that her last barren years have been fructified by knowing me, she can sing her nunc dimittis. Since all the fiery years of desire are over. Yet I doubt if they are quite over. Yet it is a fine spectacle, 6k a curious one, this old woman summing up her experience 6k hymning her love for H.B. as a swan song (6k people say an ugly song, for they say, her musical genius is another delusion—all her life then has been based on illusions; 6k that as I perceive when I talk to her is manifestly untrue). I must now write to the living Ethel—so one's perspective shifts.
Monday 27 October
How comfortless 6k uneasy my room is,—a table all choked with papers. ckc. I'm now grinding out Waves again, 6k have perhaps an hour 6k a half to spend: a short time on Dante; a short time on MSS: a short time here—

with another pen. Yesterday we went to Warlingham 6k sat in a gravel pit, like a Cezanne. I made this comparison, to appease myself for not being in France. And we walked along a bridle path; 6k saw old quiet farms, 6k rabbits, 6k downs, all preserved as by a magic ring from Croydon. Never was the division between London 6k country so sharp. Home, 6k made dinner; 6k read MSS: But rather casually 6k unanimously we have decided within the last week to stop the Press. Yes; it is to come to an end. That is we are to go on only with my books 6k Ls. 6k Dotty perhaps; 6k what we print ourselves. In short, we shall revert next October to what we were in the Hogarth House days—an odd reversal, seeing that we are now financially successful. But what's money if you sell freedom? we say. And what's the point of publishing these innocuous novels 6k pamphlets that are neither good nor bad? So we make this decision, casually, walking round the Square after lunch 6k thus slip another shackle from our shoulders. This is what I call living with a pilot in the ship—not mere drifting ahead.
Sunday 2 November
And tonight the final letter to Nelly is to be sent; there it rests in my red bag, but I have great reluctance to read it over, as I had to write it. Yet I don't suppose she will mind acutely. For one thing, she has been prepared, I think, by our readiness to do without her; 6k then since the famous scene last November I think she has been aware of a change. These 5 months at any rate have proved that we are freer, easier 6k no less comfortable, indeed more comfortable, without her, for all her good humour, sense 6k niceness; which now that I have written the letter, I see once more in their true proportions. And I am vague 6k in the air, because I doubt that Annie will come—doubt if she should—wish indeed to have livers out in future. Oh never again to have scenes with servants—that is my ambition. How we used to walk round the Sqre considering Nelly's ultimatums; what hours we have spent 6k should still spend. No: this is a wholesome break, 6k takes 10 years off my shoulders. Oh, but I shall have to see her—
[? Wednesday 5 November]
These are further notes about Nelly, since it is a queer little bit of life broken off; servant psychology 6k so on. To my long, explicit 6k affectionate letter she has returned one word: Dear Mr 6k Mrs Woolf. Thank you for your cheque: Yrs truly.
But yesterday evening, an embittered, frightened angry voice, this is

Rivett's description, & by the sound she identified Nelly, was heard on the telephone. She asked for me; but I was, happily, out or down here. We conjecture that after launching her snub, she came up to consult Lottie, perhaps see Mrs Hunt, & for some reason they decided upon an interview. I imagine she has now gone back. And the sense of freedom spreads wider & wider. The letter is sent; the shock over. And I come in & find the house empty & silent.
A slight inaccuracy, if applied to the past few days. Ethel Lyn & Hugh Walpole to tea on Monday; Vita Clive & Hilda Matheson to dine; Hugh again later, & his piteous, writhing & wincing & ridiculous & flaying alive story of Willie Maugham's portrait.1 Indeed it was a clever piece of torture; Hugh palpably exposed as the hypocritical booming thick skinned popular novelist, who lectures on young novelists & makes his own books sell: who is thick fingered & insensitive in every department. But said Hugh, turning round on his bed of thorns again & yet again, & pressing ; them further & further in, Thats not what I mind so much. What I mind are a few little things—little things Willie & I had together—only he & I knew—those he has put into print. Thats what I cant get over. For instance I cant tell you all the meanings there are to me in his saying I was like a man in love with a duchess—(the meaning is that Hugh is in love with a male opera singer2). Would you mind Virginia? (this said past midnight, Vita & I alone) And I said I should. "And he wrote tome & said he could not believe that I could be hurt. He said he had written without a thought of me. But that letter is almost worse than the book."
Clive is home blind of one eye & much in need of society. I thought him, why heaven knows, rather admirable & touching; determined not to be a burden on his friends, yet very grateful for our kindness (& I must ask him to come in tonight). So much instructed somehow in the little graces & also the inevitable lonelinesses, without his Mary, but then I think he has his Joan. And he cant read or write, & has hired a reader. Its the evenings that will be bad he said. Nessa characteristically writes from Cassis that she doesn't think much of it, & supposes that spectacles, 'which we all wear' will put it right.
And Julian's poems are out, & I am relieved—but why, vanity of my own critical powers? jealousy of his fame?—to hear that Vita agrees with me that for all his admirable good sense & observation & love of country We, he is no poet. People who treat words as he does rather afflict me—
•  The character of Alroy Kear in W. Somerset Maugham's novel Cakes and Ale was
closely based upon that of his old friend Hugh Walpole. ¦•  *his was Lauritz Melchoir (1890-1973), the Danish Heldentenor, whom for some
years Walpole regarded as his 'perfect friend'.

I say this to discharge me partially of vanity & jealousy. Common sense & Cambridge are not enough, whatever Bunny may say.
Saturday 8 November
I pressed his hand when we said goodbye with some emotion: thinking This is to press a famous hand: It was Yeats, at Ottoline's last night. He was born in 1865 so that he is now a man of 65—& I am 48: & thus he has a right to be so much more vital, supple, high charged & altogether seasoned & generous. I was very much impressed by all this in action. He has grown very thick (Last time I met him—& I may note that he had never heard of me & I was slightly embarrassed by O.'s painstaking efforts to bring me to his notice, was in 1907—or 8 I suppose, at dinner at 46).3 He is very broad; very thick; like a solid wedge of oak. His face is too fat; but it has its hatchet forehead in profile, under a tangle of grey & brown hair; the eyes are luminous, direct, but obscured under glasses; they have however seen close, the vigilant & yet wondering look of his early portraits. I interrupted a long dream story of de la Mares when I came in: about seeing Napoleon with ruby eyes & so on. Yeats was off, with vehemence even, kindling & stumbling a little, on dreams; those which have colour are rare & mean—I forget what. De la Mare told another very cryptic dream about a book with circles in it; the outermost ring black, the inner blue & so on. Yeats identified this dream at once as the dream of the soul in some particular state—I forget what. Tagore had told him he said that he had dreamed once as a young man; & if he could find the dream again it would become permanent.4 And so on to dreaming states, & soul states; as others talk of Beaverbrook & free trade—as if matters of common knowledge. So familiar was he, that I perceived that he had worked out a complete psychology, which I could only catch on to momentarily in my alarming ignorance. De la M. had just been to the National Gallery, & had got no pleasure from the pictures. I said this flow & ebb of consciousness made all criticism unstable. He said one must go by the plus's always. Yeats said he could get nothing from Rembrandt, nothing from EI Greco. He then explained our pleasure in pictures, or other works of art, by an elaborate metaphor, taken from his psychology; about the sharp edges of things being brought into contact; & the same

order then coming in our consciousness: & thus our closest contact results from some sudden clicking to of edges, which—I have lost the metaphor now completely. Then, discussing what poems we could come back to unsated, I said Lycidas; De la M. said no. Not Milton for him: he could never recognise his own emotions there. Milton's woodbine was not his woodbine, nor M.'s Eve his Eve. Yeats said he could not get satisfaction from Milton; it was Latinised poetry (as somebody said, Milton had (in some way irreparably) damaged the English language). This attached itself to a cosmology evidently, in which Latins & Romans play their part. And so to modern poetry, & the question of the spade. Yeats said that "we", de la M. & himself, wrote 'thumbnail' poems only because we are at the end of an era. Here was another system of thought, of which I could only snatch fragments. He said that the spade has been embalmed by 30 centuries of association; not so the steam roller. The great age of poetry, Shakespeare's age, was subjective; ours is objective; civilisations end when they become objectified. Poets can only write when they have symbols. And steam rollers are not covered in symbolism —perhaps they may be after 30 generations. He & de la M. can only write small fireside poems. Most of emotion is outside their scope. All left to the novelists I said—but how crude & jaunty my own theories were beside his: indeed I got a tremendous sense of the intricacy of the art; also of its meanings, its seriousness, its importance, which wholly engrosses this large active minded immensely vitalised man. Wherever one cut him, with a little question, he poured, spurted fountains of ideas. And I was impressed by his directness, his terseness. No fluff & dreaminess. Letters he said must be answered. He seemed to live in the centre of an immensely intricate briar bush; from wh. he could issue at any moment; & then withdraw again. And every twig was real to him. He also spoke about the necessity of tragedy. It is necessary to attempt the impossible; but it must be possible. All creation is the result of conflict. James Stephens, some of whose poems he much admires, & I have never read, was so poor as a boy that he used to pick up the bread thrown to the ducks & eat it.5 There must be tragedy in order to bring out the reverse of the soul. (This belongs to another theory about the soul & its antitype, which I vaguely remember in his poems). He said that Tom very cleverly made use of mythologies, for instance the Fisher King in the Waste Land; & mythologies are necessary. Ezra Pound writes beautifully when he uses them. hen suddenly must speak of—some common object—& at once his

rhythm breaks. I said we did not talk enough, not easily & equally. He told us of men he had met in trains. I liked his transitions to dialect & humour. With men perhaps he might be coarse. He had been staying with Masefield who, to celebrate the 30th year of their friendship, had got young women to recite Yeatses lyrics at Boars Hill. Their voices had been too small for the theatre; but Yeats had been greatly touched.6 Judith M. is nice & good but not pretty. Hence she will have to marry a man she knows; not at first sight. And Mrs M. seemed simple & he liked her better than usual. Indeed, he seemed very cordial, very generous; having been warmed up by his 65 years; & being in command of all his systems, philosophies, poetics & humanities; not tentative any more. Hence no doubt his urbanity & generosity. Compare him with Tom for instance, who came to tea the day before, & may be, for anything I know, as good a poet. Poor Tom is all suspicion, hesitation & reserve. His face has grown heavier fatter & whiter. There is a leaden sinister look about him. But oh—Vivienne! Was there ever such a torture since life began!—to bear her on ones shoulders, biting, wriggling, raving, scratching, unwholesome, powdered, insane, yet sane to the point of insanity, reading his letters, thrusting herself on us, coming in wavering trembling—Does your dog do that to frighten me? Have you visitors? Yes we have moved again. Tell me, Mrs Woolf, why do we move so often? Is it accident? Thats what I want to know (all this suspiciously, cryptically, taking hidden meanings). Have some honey, made by our bees, I say. Have you any bees? (& as I say it, I know I am awaking suspicion). Not bees. Hornets. But where? Under the bed. And so on, until worn out with half an hour of it, we gladly see them go. Vivienne remarked that I had made a signal that they should go. This bag of ferrets is what Tom wears round his neck.

On second thoughts, Yeats & de la Mare talk too much about dreams to be quite satisfactory. This is what makes de la Mare's stories (lent me by Ottoline) wobbly.7
[? Tuesday 11 November]
Now what will happen next, when The Waves is done? I think some book-of criticism; (Mrs Stiles to take away wastepaper) But I am dissatisfied with my own smart endings. I must get on to a peak & survey the question. These are our stages.
I thought, to give this book continuity, I would copy every day the headlines in the paper. But I cant remember them.
Mr Scullin 6k Labour. Armistice day celebrations. The Blazing Car murder. Prince of Wales's next Expedition.—at a shot.8
William Plomer is back.9 Nessa returns, wifely ready to read or sit with Clive, on Thursday. Roger too. And I cry O Solitude—& look towards Rodmell. And the weather goes on blue & balmy. And I go to the dentist, & so does Leonard. And Rivett is a nervous but clean cook. And Nelly has appealed to Dr McGlashan. And we await development.
The other night, sitting on the floor by my side, Vita suffered considerably from jealousy of Ethel. She praised her, stoutly, but bitterly. She has all the abandonment that I, living in this age of subtlety & reserve, have lost. She claims you; rushes in where I force myself to hold back. When Hugh was here he said casually that he had met Ethel at tea. Such agony went through her she could not speak. And I noticed nothing; & in my usual blind way, made my usual mocking joke. This V. took seriously & brought out my letter for me to read.
[Wednesday 12 November]
Alas, too numb brained to go on with Bernard's soliloquy this morning. A very little weight on me brings me low. And Clive has been a little

weight, added to the usual round; the dentist, shops & callers &c. So I cant write. And last night we sat through a sticky valiant evening at Hope's. Hope liberated from all restraint by [illegible] was it? Hope school girlish, voluble, excited, the first time I have seen it since Jane's death. Mrs Plunket Greene there (20 years added since we met at Savage's dinner party) now she is grey, pendulous; with the oddest bird technique of the head & eyes I have ever seen—for ever craning, peering, advancing, exactly like a lively arch bird of some kind. A Roman Catholic—not, unless you remembered her 20 years ago, a very nice or clever woman— something too insinuating.10
Wednesday 12 November
And I had my talk with Nelly last night. Going up to sit still for an hour, & read perhaps Dotty's poem I heard a shop bell, I thought, looked down the stairs & saw Nelly. So we sat for two hours. An odd meandering contradictory, mainly affectionate & even intimate talk. One of her preoccupations to establish her own hard lot & innocence of all offence among the servants of the click.11 We had treated her badly, turning her off because of ill-health. Confronted by me, she advanced this more as an excuse, almost a joke than anything. "Still I can't understand why you won't have me back . . ." But Nelly, you gave me notice io times in the past 6 years—& more . . . But I always took it back. Yes, but that sort of thing gets on the nerves. Oh ma'am I never meant to tire you—dont go on talking now if it tires you—but you wouldnt give me any help. Now Grace had all the help she wants—Well, I says, this is long service. But then Nelly you forgot that when you were with us. But then for 3 years I've been ill. And I shall never like any mistress as much as I like you . . . & so on & so on—all the old tunes, some so moving; so pathetic, some (I'm glad to say) so irrational hysterical & with that curious senseless reiteration of grievances which used to drive me frantic. The truth—but I could never tell her this—is that that kind of dependence & intimacy, with its exactness, & jealousy & its infinite minuteness wears one down; is a psychological strain. And then the gossip. Oh I wont say how I've

heard, but I've heard—. You say-------& so at last, after every variety of
feeling, I was left with the one feeling No I could not have you sleeping here again. To be free of this inspection this frying in greasy pans, at all costs. None of this can be said, & the situation, if far less stormy than I feared, has its sharp edges. Poor old Nelly one thinks, finding a place— packing up—going to Registrys—after 15 years.
[Added later] And then I let her come back, for 3 months, from Jan. 1st. How am I ever to apologise to myself sufficiently?
Sunday 23 November
Ethel yesterday in a state of wonderment at her own genius. "Cant think how I happened" she says, putting on my hat, & bidding me observe what a nutshell it is on top of her gigantic brow.
Another observation, based on parties at Rhondda's & lunch with Harold:12 given clothes I could soon dine & lunch every day & get so easily the hang of it that it mattered nothing. And so would have no point.
Sunday 30 November
"Oh I have had so much unhappiness in my life" said Mary, sobbing "It has been so dangerous, so difficult. How I envy you!"
Tuesday 2 December
No I cannot write that very difficult passage in The Waves this
morning (how their lives hang lit up against
Soon after this A B. went     the palace) all because of Arnold Bennett &
wJer31^dr,ankfa^ss°f Ethel [Sands]'s party.* I can hardly set one water, & died of typhoid.           , L.        J   /      i^,        T        r        1
(March 30th, his funeral word after anotner- rhere l was for 2 hours, today)                                 so it seemed, alone with B. in Ethel's little
back room. And this meeting I am convinced was engineered by B. to 'get on good terms with Mrs Woolf—when heaven knows I don't care a rap if I'm on terms with B. or not. B. I say;

because he can't say B. He ceases—shuts his eyes—leans back. One waits. "begin" he at last articulates quietly, without any fluster. But the method lengthens out intolerably a rather uninspired discourse. Its true, I like the old creature: I do my best, as a writer, to detect signs of genius in his smoky brown eye: I see certain sensuality, power, I suppose: but O as he cackled out "what a blundering fool I am—what a baby—compared with Desmond McCarthy—how clumsy—how could I attack professors?" This innocence is engaging; but wd. be more so if I felt him, as he infers, a "creative artist". He said that George Moore in The Mummer's Wife had shown him the Five Towns: taught him what to see there: has a profound admiration for G.M.: but despises him for boasting of his sexual triumphs. "He told me that a young girl had come to see him. And he asked her, as she sat on the sofa, to undress. And he said, she took of [f ] all her clothes & let him look at her— Now that I dont believe . . . But he is a prodigious writer—he lives for words. Now he's ill. Now he's an awful bore—he tells the same stories over & over. And soon people will say of me "He's dead"." I rashly said "Of your books?" No, of me—he replied, attaching, I suppose, a longer life than I do to his books.
"Its the only life" he said (this incessant scribbling, one novel after another, one thousand words daily) I dont want anything else. I think of nothing but writing. Some people are bored. "You have all the clothes you want, I suppose" I said. "And baths—And beds. And a yacht." "Oh yes, my clothes cdnt be better cut."
And at last I drew Lord David in. And we taunted the old creature with thinking us refined. He said the gates of Hatfield were shut "shut away from life". 'But open on Thursdays' said Lord D. "I dont want to go on Thursdays" said B. "And you drop your aitches on purpose" I said "thinking that you possess more 'life' than we do." "I sometimes tease" said B. "But I dont think I possess more life than you do. Now I must go home. I have to write one thousand words tomorrow morning".
And this left only the scrag end of the evening: & this left me in a state where I can hardly drive my pen across the page. Question:   Why does Desmond like talking to Lord Esher?2 Reflection: it is presumably a bad thing to look through articles, reviews
&c. to find one's own name. Yet I often do. Resolution: To say to Ethel one day—How can you attach this importance
to everything you do when you call yourself a Christian (inspired by
this mornings letter 6k its emphasis about the score of the Prison)

Thursday 4 December
One word of slight snub in the Lit. Sup. today makes me determine, first, to alter the whole of The Waves; second, to put my back up against the public—one word of slight snub.3
Friday 12 December
This, I think, is the last days breathing space I allow myself before I tackle the last lap of The Waves. I have had a week off—that is to say I have written three little sketches; & dawdled, & spent a morning shopping, & a morning, this morning arranging my new table & doing odds & ends —but I think I have got my breath again & must be off for 3 or perhaps 4 weeks more. Then, as I think, I shall make one consecutive writing of the waves &c—the interludes—so as to work it into one—& then—oh dear, some must be written again; & then, corrections; & then send to Mabel; & then correct the type; & then give to Leonard. Leonard perhaps shall get it some time late in March. Then put away; then print, perhaps in June.4
Meanwhile we dine with Mary on Sunday to meet Mr Hart Davis who may come to the press—but in what capacity?5 And two days ago we saw over 25 T[avistock]. S[quare]. to which we may move, if we decide to leave this, & can let it. But there too are obstacles; an hotel building alongside, & fewer rooms, & more expense.
p,n„ 1     ,,.           Spanish Revolution.  Russian  timber yard scandal.
Paper headlines.       *                    .    .                              J
Burst water main in Cambridge Circus."

Tuesday 16 December
I will never dine out again. I will burn my evening dress. I have gone through this door. Nothing exists beyond. I have taken my fence: & now need never whip myself to dine with Colefax, Ethel, Mary again.
These reflections were hammered in indelibly last night at Argyll House. The same party: same dresses; same food. To talk to Sir Arthur about Q. V.'s letters, & the dyestuff bill, & I forget7—I sacrificed an evening alone with Vita, an evening alone by myself—an evening of pleasure. And so it goes on perpetually. Lord & Lady Esher, Arnold Bennett—old Birrell. Forced, dry, sterile, infantile conversation. And I am not even excited at going. So the fence is not only leapt, but fallen. Why jump?
Thursday 18 December
Spain strikes. Illness of M. Poincare. Suicide of Peter Warlock. Dyestuff Bill.8
Lord David, Lytton & Clive last night. Told them how I had burnt my evening dress in the gas fire—general agreement that parties are a folly. Clive specially emphatic. Talk about the riddle of the universe (Jeans' book) whether it will be known; not by us; found out suddenly: about rhythm in prose; Lytton is bringing out a new book of essays; what shall it be called; on living abroad; Clive says we (L. & I) are provincial. I say no mud abroad & fireflies in one's hair; Blenheim discussed; Lytton against it; Clive in favour; I say no sense of human personality; Lord David's aunt perpetually tears up her life of Ld Salisbury; feels the cause of the lunatics; no Cecils like dogs; Q.V. discussed; Bitter tea; A Lion

rages; Clive's eyes; Ld D. sneezed across the table; my bag came; fog all day.9
[Friday 19 December]
Spanish Rising. Prince of Wales' Chill. Camera beats M.10
"Violet so delighted me", said Ethel, "by saying precisely what I wished her to say. I was so struck by the terrific strength & gentleness of V. & by her nose". Now I dont like this: I dont like that Ethel should know that I like compliments; I dont like liking them; I dont like Mrs Woodhouse fabricating them on the telephone.11
Saturday zo December
W. H. D. Douglas drowned: six English lost: New motor regulation. Lord Willingdon appointed Viceroy of India.12
And Kingsley Martin lunched with us (sweeping up turkey as a char sweeps feathers) & said that the Nation & the N.S. are to amalgamate; & he is to be editor (highly secret, like all nonsense) & would L. be literary editor? No; L. wd. not.13

Horror death of Douglas: Indian Conference. Fog. Intermittent. Weather to be colder.15
It occurred to me last night while listening to a Beethoven quartet that I would merge all the interjected passages into Bernard's final speech, & end with the words O solitude: thus making him absorb all those scenes, & having no further break. This is also to show that the theme effort, effort, dominates: not the waves: & personality: & defiance: but I am not sure of the effect artistically; because the proportions may need the intervention of the waves finally so as to make a conclusion.
Tuesday 23 December
I will make this hasty note about being robbed. I put my bag under my coat at Marshall & Snelgrove's. I turned; & felt, before I looked "It is gone". So it was. Then began questions & futile messages. Then the detective came. He stopped a respectable elderly woman apparently shopping. They exchanged remarks about 'the usual one—no she's not here today. Its a young woman in brown fur." Meanwhile I was ravaged, of course, with my own futile wishes—how I had thought, as I put down my bag, this is foolish. I was admitted to the underwor[l]d. I imagined the brown young woman peeping, pouncing. And it was gone my 6 pounds—my two brooches—all because of that moment. They throw the bags away, said the detective. These dreadful women come here—but
ment in December 1960; his first literary editor was R. Ellis Roberts whom he inherited from the New Statesman. For an account of the amalgamation of the N& A and the New Statesman see The New Statesman. The History ofthe First Fifty Years (1963) by Edward Hyams, pp 118-23. 
not so much as to some ofthe Oxford St. shops. Fluster, regret, humiliation, curiosity, something frustrated, foolish, something jarred, by this underwor[l]d—a foggy evening—going home, penniless—thinking of my green bag—imagining the woman rifling it—her home—her husband —Now to Rodmell in the fog.16
Rodmell. Saturday 27 December
But whats the use of talking about Bernard's final speech? We came down on Tuesday, & next day my cold was the usual influenza, & I am in bed with the usual temperature, & cant use my wits or, as is visible, form my letters. I daresay 2 days will see me normal; but then the sponge behind my forehead will be dry & pale—& so my precious fortnight of exaltation & concentration is snatched; & I shall go back to the racket & Nelly without a thing done. I cheer myself by thinking that I may evolve some thoughts[?]. Meanwhile it rains; Annie's child is ill; the dogs next door yap & yap; all the colours are rather dim & the pulse of life dulled. I moon torpidly through book after book: Defoe's Tour; Rowan's autofbio-
graph]y; Benson's Memoirs; Jeans; in the fam-Diary ofa Somerset Rector   iliar way.17 The parson—Skinner—who shot
himself emerges like a bloody sun in a fog. a book worth perhaps looking at again in a clearer mood. He shot himself in the beech woods above his house; spent a life digging up stones & reducing all places to Camelodunum; quarrelled; bipkered; yet loved his sons; yet turned them out of doors—a clear hard picture of one type of human life—the exasperated, unhappy, struggling, intolerably afflicted. Oh & I've read Q.V.'s letters; & wonder what wd. happen had Ellen Terry been born Queen. Complete disaster to the Empire? Q.V. entirely unaesthetic; a kind of Prussian competence, & belief in herself her only prominences; material; brutal[?] to Gladstone; like a mistress with a dishonest footman.

Knew her own mind. But the mind radically commonplace, only its inherited force, & cumulative sense of power, making it remarkable.
Monday 29 December
One of my trial runs to exercise my hands. (Still in bed). Skinner was bred to the Bar, but became, unfortunately, a clergyman. Unfortunately too his wife died, of consumption, leaving him with 3 children. Of these the only satisfactory one was Laura, who inherited her father's love of collecting & tabulating, but also her mother's consumption, so that before she had collected, in a very orderly way, many cabinets of shells, she died; & the other children were unsatisfactory.
Skinner was rector of Camerton in Somerset, & there he remained, year after year, without any aptitude whatsoever for the souls of the living. A clever, upright conscientious man, he did his duty by his flock, by perpetually admonishing them. That they were always bad, seems strange, but was to him true. A colliery was being formed at the village. The morals of colliers are perhaps loose. At any rate, no village in England seems to have contained so many insolent, wicked, ungrateful villagers. And Skinner was forever comparing them with the Romans. His only comfort was to dream himself back into Camelodunum, & to forget 1828. But being a disciplinarian, he was tormented by the need for reproving the living. His conscience refused to let him shut his eyes upon the sufferings of the halfwitted Mrs Goold, or the iniquities practised upon imbecile paupers at the workhouse, & he must perpetually go his rounds among the sick & dying, for accidents among the miners were frequent. He was always on the side of the afflicted; never on the side of the happy. He considered himself one of the worst treated of men, & imagined malignancies & insolences on all sides. Mrs Jarrett, the Squiress, was an arch-hypocrite. All her kindness had deceit behind it. Then he was sometimes asked to a ball—to a dinner party with French dishes. He much preferred solitude to the most brilliant society. Perpetually censorious, he found fault with French dishes, with dressing up, with all enjoyment— save only that of writing & writing, long accounts of places, catalogues of antiquity, & in special, his great work upon Etymology. He met with only ridicule here too. At a parsons dinner, he was asked to explain, on his system, the name of Bumstead, which he did—& then suspected that it was all a joke against him. Suspicion always came after a moments pleasure. Perhaps the only unalloyed pleasure was found in his visits to Stourhead, the seat of [blank in ms], where a party of antiquaries stayed for a day or two, giving themselves up to questions of Romans & Britons,

of camps 6k buried cities. There, sitting alone in the luxurious library, he enjoyed the exquisite pleasure of copying extracts from—shall we say?— Ptolemy Theophrastus; & the good Bishop of Bath & Wells made him happy too in spite ofa few suspicions—by asking him to spend the week end at Wells. These however were his only alleviations. Home life at Camerton became more & more sordid, humiliating, comfortless & by degrees violent. Jeered at & insulted by the rude peasants & farmers, who told him to his face that he was mad, his treatment was no better in his own vicarage, & from his own flesh 6k blood. There were terrible scenes with his sons. Once Joseph told him that he was making himself ridiculous by his writings, 6k was insane. Attempts to keep his son from drinking cider ended—so irritating was his manner—in violent curses. The sons were always being sent to stay with their grandmother at Bath. It was his temper that was at fault, he said; but they were at fault to irritate his temper. The servants left, because he wd. not let them walk out after dinner. The farmers cursed him because he suspected them of stealing his tythes; he nervously, irritatingly 6k imcompetently tried to exact his due of lambs 6k haycocks, He knew nothing of farming, nothing of country life. All he knew was that Camerton had been Camelodunum, 6k his obsession on this point made even the good natured Baronet protest that he carried Camelodunum too far. So at last—all he could do was to write 6k write 6k write. The blank pages of his diary alone neither sneered, nor hawked in his face, nor mocked him behind his back, nor plotted his downfall, nor called him mad. Eighty four volumes of antiquarian lumber 6k daily complaint 6k journalising were scribbled 6k put away in certain great iron chests which were bequeathed to the British Museum. At last his confidant was the future—in 50 years after his death, he said, these 84 volumes were to be given to the world—which world would understand his great contribution to etymology, 6k take his side against the Churchwarden, Mrs Jarrett, Owen, the servant girl 6k all the rest ofhis ungrateful perpetually afflicting tribe. Fame 6k comfort would then be his. No doubt this secret confidence kept him going, through the gathering miseries of We. For the unhappy man was not blind to his faults. His chief misery must have come from the struggle of love 6k irritation. He loved his sons—yet drove them away. They fell ill, 6k he became all kindness 6k consideration—6k yet how could the unfortunate Owen endure to have *Us father with him?—his egotistic, exacting, morose, but devoted father? We gave pain even by his affection. And suddenly the diary, written in a Crabbed 6k illegible hand, ceases to be copied out any longer. The brother whose task it was died.
Skinner went on writing, but nobody could read his script. Perhaps the

knowledge that even this confidant had failed him finally decided him. At any rate, 7 years later, he went out one December morning in the beechwoods, 6k fired. They found his dead body 6k buried it—exacerbated, scarred, covered with infernal irritation—in the grave of his wife 6k Laura.
Now this little narrative being run off,—6k Lord, how difficult to write in bed—I report that the machine is not seriously damaged; 6k if I can get out, 6k move about, 6k yet not get a headache, I daresay in 3 days I shall be beginning to play gently with the waves. I dont have the temptations here of London. Not normal, but being normal is I daresay rather a fetish. All Mrs Dalloway was written with a temp, of 99 I think. How difficult though to get back into the right mental state: what a queer balance is needed. This little Skinner sketch is in the wrong order; but I dont fumble for words. Could let my mind fly, am not as I prove now, used up by an hour's exercise.
It rains. Nessa is driving from Seend today. Vita broadcasting. That bedroom voice, singing Bach, talking ofthe weather, has come in handy.
Tuesday 30 December
What it wants is presumably unity; but it is I think rather good (I am talking to myself over the fire about The Waves). Suppose I could run all the scenes together more?—by rhythm, chiefly. So as to avoid those cuts; so as to make the blood run like a torrent from end to end—I dont want the waste that the breaks give; I want to avoid chapters; that indeed is my achievement, if any here: a saturated, unchopped, completeness; changes of scene, of mood, of person, done without spilling a drop. Now if it ed. be worked over with heat 6k currency thats all it wants. And I am getting my blood up. (temp. 99)
But all the same I went to Lewes, 6k the Keynes's came to tea; 6k having got astride my saddle the whole world falls into shape; it is this writing that gives me my proportions.

